{{AI generated}}
{{Infobox framework
| name = 9-Square Theory
| creators = [[Charlie Cushing]]
| year = c. 2010
| scope = Spatial grid for poi movement and transitions
}}

'''9-Square Theory''' is a spatial framework for [[flow arts]] created by [[Charlie Cushing]] (also founder of prop manufacturer LanternSmith) that quantizes the space around a spinner's body into a grid of positions. The grid provides a systematic way to map transitions between movements, switch between spatial modes, and construct [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|CAPs]] and [[Hybrid (flow arts)|hybrid]] patterns.<ref name="9sq-spinmore">{{cite web |url=https://www.spinmorepoi.com/charlie-9-square-theory-1/ |title=Charlie's 9-Square Theory #1 |publisher=Spin More Poi}}</ref>

9-Square Theory was described as part of the "Golden Age of poi ideas" alongside the [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]] and [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]].<ref name="pvotd">{{cite web |url=https://poividoftheday.tumblr.com/post/68881181993/ |title=9-Square Theory |publisher=Poi Vid of the Day}}</ref> [[Ben Drexler]] groups Unit Circle Theory, Vulcan Tech Gospel, and 9-Square Theory as attempts "by computer savvy young men to apply the tools of combinatorics and logic to the world of poi flowers."<ref name="drex-not-tech">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2CD6TT8JWlM&t=271s |title=This is Not Tech Poi - A History of Artistic Movements in the Advanced Poi World |author=DrexFactor |date= |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=4:31}}</ref>

== Concept ==

The theory divides the space around the performer into a grid of positions. Each position represents a location where the poi (or other prop) can be placed relative to the body. Movements are described as transitions between grid positions, and patterns can be mapped as sequences of position changes.

The grid operates within a single [[Plane (flow arts)|plane]] (typically the wall plane).<ref name="drex-9sq">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2010/04/22/video_tech_blog_83_bth_vs_cap_9_square_transitions |title=Video Tech Blog #83: BTH vs CAP with 9-Square Transitions |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2010-04-22}}</ref>

== Cushing's flower terminology ==

A significant component of Cushing's theoretical work is an alternative terminology for [[Flower (poi)|flowers]]. The standard vocabulary lacked precision; as [[Ben Drexler]] observed, "there isn't a single falsifiable definition for a flower petal."<ref name="drex-petals">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z1Vzb8JQ44E&t=1039s |title=How Do We Count Poi Flower Petals? |author=DrexFactor |date= |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=17:19}}</ref> Cushing proposed the following replacements:

* '''Lobes''': regions where the poi spins inside the hand path (replacing "inspin petals").<ref name="drex-petals" />
* '''Anti-lobes''': regions where the poi spins outside the hand path (replacing "antispin petals").<ref name="drex-petals" />
* '''Iso-spin''': a 1:1 ratio flower in which the hand and poi are locked in unison.
* '''Pro-spin''': the poi completes more beats than the hand, both moving the same direction (replacing "in-spin").
* '''Anti-spin''': retained unchanged from standard terminology.

=== Mathematical framework ===

The system uses a Cartesian coordinate framework with parametric equations. A variable ''B'' controls the poi-to-hand beat ratio; negative values of ''B'' produce anti-spin patterns. [[Ted Petrovsky]] collaborated with Cushing on extending this framework to plane bending and [[Toroid (poi)|toroid]] applications.<ref name="drex-toroids">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mlsByYdpj6E&t=376s |title=I Was Wrong About Poi Antibend Toroids! |author=DrexFactor |date= |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=6:16}}</ref>

=== Adoption ===

The naming system itself "did not catch on at all" within the broader community, but "one thing it did become useful for was naming toroids."<ref name="drex-toroids" />

== Applications ==

9-Square Theory enables several techniques:<ref name="9sq-spinmore" /><ref name="drex-not-tech" />

* Finding transitions between movements using grid positions as waypoints
* Constructing algorithms for changing [[timing and direction]] through [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|CAPs]] and polyrhythm hybrids
* Systematic exploration of the spatial possibilities within a plane

{{Unverified claim|The original article stated cross-discipline applications including connections to tutting and Laban Movement Analysis. These claims could not be verified from available sources and have been removed.}}

== Recommended poi length ==

Cushing recommends a poi length of 1/2 arm length for optimal 9-Square patterns, as this ratio produces the cleanest grid alignment.<ref name="wickup">{{cite web |url=https://wickup.wordpress.com/2015/06/12/charlies-9-square-theory-for-poi-1-poi-length-planes-9-square-introduction/ |title=Charlie's 9-Square Theory for Poi #1 |publisher=Wick Up |date=2015-06-12}}</ref>

== Presentation ==

Cushing presented 9-Square Theory in a 10-part video series totaling approximately 1.5 hours, originally hosted on spinmorepoi.com. The series covers poi length, [[Plane (flow arts)|planes]], grid introduction, positions, transitions, and pattern construction.<ref name="9sq-spinmore" /><ref name="tabjuggler">{{cite web |url=https://tabjuggler.tumblr.com/post/8593148435/charlies-9-square-theory |title=Charlie's 9-Square Theory |publisher=Tab Juggler}}</ref>

{{Note|The SpinMorePoi YouTube channel contains seven performance clips with music but no theory content. The original 10-part instructional series was likely hosted on the spinmorepoi.com website.}}

== Relationship to other frameworks ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Framework !! Relationship
|-
| [[Vulcan Tech Gospel|VTG]] || 9-Square provides spatial scaffolding that complements VTG's timing/direction classification. VTG describes ''what'' patterns are; 9-Square maps ''where'' they occur.
|-
| [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|CAPs]] || CAPs can be mapped onto the 9-Square grid, with each segment occupying specific grid positions. The [[Continuous Assembly Patterns#8-Step CAP|8-Step CAP]] (also by Cushing) uses grid positions as scaffolding for pattern assembly.<ref name="drex-9sq" />
|-
| [[The Kinetic Alphabet|TKA]] || TKA's grid system parallels 9-Square's spatial quantization. Both divide the space around the performer into discrete positions for mapping hand and prop locations.
|-
| [[QFT Notation]] || Also by Cushing. QFT provides a written shorthand for recording the movements that 9-Square maps spatially.<ref name="drex-icaza">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jUD3Z8lmHMU&t=639s |title=Leo Icaza: The Most Influential Poi Spinner You've Never Heard Of |author=DrexFactor |date= |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=10:39}}</ref>
|}

== See also ==

* [[Charlie Cushing]]
* [[Ted Petrovsky]]
* [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]]
* [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]]
* [[QFT Notation]]
* [[Plane (flow arts)]]
* [[Toroid (poi)]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

== External links ==

* [https://www.spinmorepoi.com/charlie-9-square-theory-1/ 9-Square Theory Part 1 at Spin More Poi]
* [https://www.drexfactor.com/category/tags/9_square_theory 9-Square Theory articles at DrexFactor]
* [https://www.lanternsmith.com/ LanternSmith] (Cushing's prop company)

[[Category:Flow arts theory]]
[[Category:Notation systems]]
