{{AI generated}}
'''Antispin''' is a type of prop rotation in [[flow arts]] where the prop rotates in the opposite direction to the hand's circular travel. If the hand orbits clockwise, an antispin prop rotates counterclockwise. Antispin is one of the two fundamental rotation types in two-prop spinning, the other being [[prospin]] (inspin).

== Description ==

In antispin motion, the prop's rotation opposes the hand's arc. As the hand traces a circular path, the prop spins ''against'' that direction. This opposition creates the distinctive petal-shaped [[Flower (flow arts)|flower]] patterns that are among the most visually recognizable elements of technical spinning.

The number of petals depends on the prop-to-hand rotation ratio:

* At '''zero additional rotations''' (0-turn anti), the prop reverses its center-relative orientation on each beat; for example, a prop facing "in" becomes "out." This is the simplest antispin motion.
* At '''one full rotation''', the prop traces a '''three-petal''' antispin flower (also called a triquetra shape, though technically distinct from the [[triquetra]] pattern).<ref name="drex-not-triquetra">{{cite web |url=https://www.drexfactor.com/index.php?q=weirdscience/2010/11/07/poi_heresies_why_3_petal_antispin_flowers_are_not_triquetras |title=Poi Heresies: Why 3-Petal Antispin Flowers Are Not Triquetras |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2010-11-07}}</ref>
* At '''two full rotations''', a '''five-petal''' flower.
* The general formula is: petal count = (2 * turns) + 1 for antispin flowers.

Antispin patterns create loops (sections where the poi and hand paths intersect) as described in [[Transition Theory]]. This contrasts with [[prospin]] patterns at low turn counts, which create arcs (parallel, non-intersecting paths).<ref name="drex-transition">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2010/09/29/soft_hard_and_mixed_transition_theory |title=Soft, Hard, and Mixed Transition Theory |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2010-09-29}}</ref>

== Terminology ==

The flow arts community uses consistent terminology for this concept:

* '''Antispin''': the most widely used community term, standard in the [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]] (VTG) and general usage.<ref name="vtg-explained">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2015/11/25/vulcan_tech_gospel_vtg_explained |title=Vulcan Tech Gospel (VTG) Explained |date=2015-11-25}}</ref>
* '''Anti''': abbreviated form used in [[The Kinetic Alphabet]] (TKA). Emphasizes opposition to the hand's arc direction.
* '''Antispin driving style''': used in [[Lorq Nichols]]' [[driving style]] taxonomy as one of eight categories of poi movement.<ref name="lorq-driving">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/tag/driving-style/ |title=Driving Style |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

Unlike [[prospin]], which has a common synonym ("inspin"), antispin is called "antispin" across virtually all frameworks.

== In notation systems ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! System !! Term !! Notes
|-
| [[Vulcan Tech Gospel|VTG]] || Antispin || Antispin flowers classified by petal count and prop-to-hand ratio (1:3 = four-petal, etc.)
|-
| [[The Kinetic Alphabet|TKA]] || Anti || One of three rotation types (pro, anti, float). Turn count determines flower complexity. At 0 turns, orientation reverses.
|-
| [[Lorq Nichols|Lorq's frameworks]] || Antispin driving style || One of eight [[driving style|driving styles]]. The [[Book of P.H.A.T.]] documents 64 patterns in the 1:3 antispin set.
|-
| [[Trigonometric model (poi)|Trigonometric model]] || Negative ''d'' value || In the parametric equation <math>x = h \cdot \sin(t) + p \cdot \sin(d \cdot t)</math>, a negative value of ''d'' produces antispin patterns. Petal count = <math>|1 - d|</math>.<ref name="drex-math">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2014/05/06/mathematical_approach_classifying_poi_patterns_introduction_and_basics |title=A Mathematical Approach to Classifying Poi Patterns: Introduction and Basics |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2014-05-06}}</ref>
|}

== Antispin flowers ==

Antispin flowers are the petal-shaped patterns traced by the prop tip during sustained antispin rotation. They are among the most studied patterns in flow arts theory.

The [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]] documents '''40 patterns''' in the 1:1 ratio set (which includes both inspin and antispin patterns).<ref name="noel-40">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/vtg-11-necessity-of-40-patterns/ |title=VTG 1:1 Necessity of 40 Patterns |publisher=Noel Yee}}</ref> [[Lorq Nichols]] documented '''64 patterns''' in the 1:3 ratio set (four-petal antispin flowers) in the [[Book of P.H.A.T.]].<ref name="phat">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/tech-tiles/ |title=Vulcan Tech Gospel Book of P.H.A.T. Volume 1 |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

Lorq Nichols further organized all flower patterns into '''9 flower families''' based on the shape and orientation of their petals.<ref name="lorq-9families">{{cite web |url=http://spinscience.xyz/2014/01/18/lorqtech-41-9-flower-families-with-trails/ |title=LORQ:TECH #41 - 9 Flower Families with Trails |publisher=Spin Science |date=2014-01-18}}</ref>

== Role in CAPs ==

Antispin petals are a key building block in [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]] (CAPs). The basic C-CAP alternates between an [[Extension (flow arts)|extension]] (arc) and one petal of an antispin flower (loop) by reversing the hand's direction every half circle. [[Transition Theory]] explains this as a '''mixed transition''', where the hand reverses while the prop maintains direction, converting arcs into loops and vice versa.<ref name="drex-transition" />

== See also ==

* [[Prospin]]
* [[Flower (flow arts)]]
* [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]]
* [[Transition Theory]]
* [[Driving style]]
* [[Timing and direction]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
