{{AI generated}}
The '''Book of P.H.A.T.''' is a reference document for [[flow arts]] pattern classification created by [[Lorq Nichols]] with contributions from [[Brian Thompson]], [[David Cantor|David "Tankboy" Cantor]], and [[Noel Yee]]. '''P.H.A.T.''' stands for "'''P'''atterns, '''H'''ybrids, '''A'''nd '''T'''ransitions."<ref name="phat">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/tech-tiles/ |title=Vulcan Tech Gospel Book of P.H.A.T. Volume 1 |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

== Contents ==

The book is divided into two parts:

* '''Part 1: Manual to Understand''': Theory covering position/rotation, hand and prop positioning, static spin, [[driving style|driving styles]], and [[timing and direction]].
* '''Part 2: 64 Patterns in [[Tech Tiles]]''': Visual demonstrations of all 64 patterns in the [[Vulcan Tech Gospel|VTG]] 1:3 ratio set (four-petal [[antispin]] [[Flower (flow arts)|flowers]]), organized in an 8x8 grid and color-coded pink for left hand and cyan for right hand.<ref name="phat" />

=== Manual to Understand ===

The theoretical section covers the following topics:<ref name="phat" />

* '''Position and rotation fundamentals''': How the hand and prop each have independent position and rotation states.
* '''Grid system''': A circle with a plus sign inscribed, establishing four reference points used to describe where the hand and prop sit at any moment in a pattern.
* '''Prop indication''': Whether the prop points toward or away from the body at each reference point.
* '''Four fundamental shapes''': The four basic shapes that a single poi can trace (see [[324 Patterns]] for the named shapes).
* '''Timing and direction''': The standard [[timing and direction]] parameters that distinguish pattern variants.

=== The 1:3 ratio ===

The patterns in the Book of P.H.A.T. belong to the 1:3 ratio set, meaning the prop completes three full rotations for every one rotation of the hand. This ratio produces four-petal [[antispin]] [[Flower (flow arts)|flowers]]. The 1:1 ratio set (two-petal flowers) was previously documented by [[Noel Yee]] as part of the original [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]]; the Book of P.H.A.T. extends the catalog into the next ratio tier.<ref name="phat" />

=== The 8x8 grid ===

The 64 patterns are arranged in an 8x8 grid. Each row represents one of eight shapes, and each column represents another of the same eight shapes. A cell at the intersection of a row and column represents the [[Hybrid (flow arts)|hybrid]] pattern produced when the left hand performs the row's shape and the right hand performs the column's shape. This grid structure makes it possible to look up any two-hand combination directly.<ref name="phat" />

== Significance ==

The Book of P.H.A.T. extends the [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]]'s pattern catalog from the 1:1 ratio set (40 patterns, documented by [[Noel Yee]]) into the 1:3 ratio set (64 patterns). It uses the [[Tech Tiles]] visualization system to present each pattern, making the full four-petal antispin flower catalog visually accessible.

== See also ==

* [[Lorq Nichols]]
* [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]]
* [[Tech Tiles]]
* [[Antispin]]
* [[Flower (flow arts)]]
* [[Driving style]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

== External links ==

* [https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/tech-tiles/ Book of P.H.A.T. Vol 1 at sirlorq.wordpress.com]

[[Category:Flow arts theory]]
[[Category:Notation systems]]
