{{AI generated}}
'''Burning Man''' is an annual gathering held in the Black Rock Desert in northern Nevada, United States. While not a [[flow arts]] event specifically, Burning Man and its worldwide network of regional events (called "burns") have been a major venue for fire performance and flow arts community development.

== Fire arts at Burning Man ==

[[Fire spinning]] is a prominent feature of Burning Man and its regional events. The event's emphasis on radical self-expression, art, and community aligns with the flow arts ethos.

=== Origins of fire performance ===

Crimson Rose performed the first fire dance on the Burning Man playa in 1991, setting The Man ablaze.<ref name="bm-fire-dance">{{cite web |url=https://journal.burningman.org/2022/10/black-rock-city/building-brc/dancing-with-fire/ |title=Dancing With Fire |publisher=Burning Man Journal |date=2022-10}}</ref> Fire performance became a recurring tradition at the event in subsequent years.

=== Fire Conclave ===

The Fire Conclave Council formed around 2000, establishing organized standards for fire performance at Burning Man.<ref name="conclave-history">{{cite web |url=https://burningman.org/event/art-performance/performance-opportunities/fire-conclave/conclave-history/ |title=Fire Conclave History |publisher=Burning Man}}</ref> Fire conclave performances at the burning of the Man on Saturday night are a central tradition. The Conclave coordinates safety protocols, performer registration, and performance logistics for what is one of the largest organized fire spinning events in the world.

== Influence on flow arts ==

Burning Man and the burn network have influenced the flow arts community in several ways:

* '''Performance venues''': Burns provide large-scale performance opportunities for fire and LED performers
* '''Community building''': Many flow arts communities trace their connections to burn culture
* '''Safety standards''': The fire performance community at Burning Man, particularly through the Fire Conclave, has helped establish safety protocols that are now standard in the wider [[fire spinning]] community
* '''Cross-pollination''': Burns bring together performers from different prop disciplines and regions

== Regional burns ==

Regional burns (officially sanctioned events inspired by Burning Man) take place worldwide. Many feature fire circles and flow arts performance spaces. These events serve as gathering points for local flow arts communities.

== See also ==

* [[Fire spinning]]
* [[Flow jam]]
* [[Flow arts]]
* [[FireDrums]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
