{{AI generated}}
'''Devil sticks''' (also called '''flower sticks''', '''gravity sticks''', or '''juggling sticks''') are a manipulation prop consisting of a center baton and two control sticks (hand sticks). The player uses the hand sticks to tap, roll, and flip the center stick without directly gripping it.

== Design ==

A standard devil stick set includes:

* '''Center stick''': 60-70 cm long, often wrapped in silicone or rubber for grip. Tapered toward the center for balance.
* '''Hand sticks''': 40-50 cm long, thinner, sometimes with a rubber or leather grip surface.

Variants include:
* '''Flower sticks''': Wider, slower-moving center stick with weighted ends. More forgiving for beginners.
* '''Fire devil sticks''': Center stick with kevlar wicks on both ends for [[fire spinning]].

== Techniques ==

Basic devil stick techniques include:

* '''Tick-tock''': Alternating taps from left to right hand stick
* '''Helicopter''': Horizontal spin above the head
* '''Propeller''': Vertical spinning in front of the body
* '''Behind the back''': Passing the center stick behind the body
* '''Fishtail''': Rapid small taps keeping the stick in one position

== Relationship to flow arts ==

Devil sticks are sometimes included in the broader [[flow arts]] community, though they have stronger historical ties to [[juggling]] and circus arts. Unlike most flow arts props, devil sticks involve indirect manipulation through the hand sticks rather than direct contact or tethered control.

== See also ==

* [[Flow arts]]
* [[Juggling]]
* [[Staff (flow arts)]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Props]]
