{{AI generated}}
'''Driving style''' is a classification system in [[flow arts]] that categorizes [[poi]] movement into eight fundamental types based on how the prop is "driven" through space. The taxonomy was developed by '''Insignia''' and documented by [[Lorq Nichols]] through his Spin Science educational materials.<ref name="lorq-driving">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/tag/driving-style/ |title=Driving Style |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

Driving styles provide a way to organize the full range of poi technique into a manageable number of categories. Each style describes a distinct relationship between the hand's movement and the prop's behavior.

== The eight driving styles ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! # !! Driving style !! Description !! Related concepts
|-
| 1 || '''[[Isolation (flow arts)|Isolation]]''' || Prop appears stationary while the hand orbits around it. Zero additional rotation relative to the hand's arc. || TKA: 0-turn pro. VTG: 1:1 inspin pattern.
|-
| 2 || '''[[Antispin]]''' || Prop rotates against the hand's travel direction, tracing petal-shaped [[Flower (flow arts)|flower]] patterns. || TKA: anti. VTG: antispin patterns (1:3, 1:5, etc.).
|-
| 3 || '''Atomics''' || Three-dimensional patterns where the prop traces paths across multiple [[Plane (flow arts)|planes]] simultaneously. || TKA: Level 8 (atomics). Lorq: 3D extensions of 2D patterns.
|-
| 4 || '''Pendulums''' || Incomplete circular motion where the prop swings back and forth rather than completing a full revolution. || Community: pendulum is a common technique term. TKA: not directly encoded as a rotation type.
|-
| 5 || '''[[Extension (flow arts)|Extension]]''' || Hand and prop travel together through space without tracing a petal pattern. A smooth, sweeping movement. || TKA: emergent from shift + pro combinations. VTG: 1:1 inspin pattern.
|-
| 6 || '''Cateye''' || An elongated, oval-shaped path traced by the prop tip. Falls between extension and antispin mechanically. || Related to extension/antispin hybrid patterns.
|-
| 7 || '''[[Continuous Assembly Patterns|CAP]]''' || Composite patterns that alternate between different movement types (typically extension and antispin) using hand reversals. || VTG: uses mixed transitions from [[Transition Theory]]. TKA: related to LOOP transformations.
|-
| 8 || '''[[Hybrid (flow arts)|Hybrid]]''' || Two different patterns performed simultaneously, one per hand. The asymmetry is spatial rather than temporal. || VTG: all four timing/direction categories apply. TKA: encoded as specific letter combinations.
|}

== Relationship between driving styles ==

The eight driving styles are not entirely independent. Several have mechanical relationships:

* '''Isolation''' is the zero-turn case of [[prospin]] (inspin). Adding rotation to an isolation produces inspin flowers.
* '''Antispin''' and '''extension''' are the two poles of [[Transition Theory]]: antispin creates loops (intersecting paths), extension creates arcs (parallel paths). The '''CAP''' driving style bridges between them using hand reversals.
* '''Cateye''' occupies a middle ground between extension and antispin, tracing an oval rather than a full circle or a petal.
* '''Pendulum''' uses incomplete rotation, making it fundamentally different from the full-revolution patterns of isolation, antispin, and extension.
* '''Atomics''' extend 2D patterns into 3D space, applying across multiple planes.
* '''Hybrid''' combines any two of the other driving styles simultaneously (one per hand).

== In notation systems ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! System !! How driving styles map
|-
| [[Vulcan Tech Gospel|VTG]] || VTG does not use the "driving style" taxonomy directly. However, the patterns VTG classifies (inspin, antispin, extensions, isolations) correspond to individual driving styles. VTG's timing/direction system applies across all driving styles.
|-
| [[The Kinetic Alphabet|TKA]] || TKA encodes the underlying mechanics (pro, anti, float, static, dash) rather than classifying by driving style. The driving style a TKA letter produces depends on the rotation type and turn count: pro at 0 turns = isolation, anti = antispin, shift + pro = extension, etc.
|-
| [[Lorq Nichols|Lorq's frameworks]] || The driving style taxonomy is native to Lorq/Insignia's work. It serves as an organizing principle across the [[Shape Matrix]], [[324 Patterns]], and [[Book of P.H.A.T.]] systems.<ref name="lorq-driving" />
|}

== Teaching application ==

Driving styles provide a useful framework for organizing a spinner's learning path. A practitioner can assess which driving styles they are comfortable with and identify gaps in their technique. The taxonomy suggests that a well-rounded spinner should be able to execute all eight driving styles in multiple [[Plane (flow arts)|planes]] and [[Timing and direction|timing/direction combinations]].

== See also ==

* [[Isolation (flow arts)]]
* [[Antispin]]
* [[Extension (flow arts)]]
* [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]]
* [[Flower (flow arts)]]
* [[Plane (flow arts)]]
* [[Lorq Nichols]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
[[Category:Flow arts theory]]
