{{AI generated}}
'''Extension''' in [[flow arts]] is a movement pattern where the hand and prop travel together through space without the prop tracing a petal or flower pattern. The prop tip sweeps a wide arc that follows the hand's path, creating a smooth, expansive visual effect.

Extension is one of the fundamental movement types in two-prop spinning and a key building block in [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]] (CAPs).

== Description ==

During an extension, the hand traces a circular path and the prop moves in alignment with that path. Unlike [[antispin]] patterns (which create petal-shaped flowers) or [[Isolation (flow arts)|isolations]] (where the prop appears stationary), an extension carries the prop through space in a broad, sweeping motion.

The visual result is a large, open circle rather than a lobed flower shape. Extensions tend to feel powerful and expansive because both the hand and prop cover significant space together.

In [[Transition Theory]], extensions are classified as '''arcs''', sections of a pattern where the hand and poi paths run parallel without intersecting. This contrasts with '''loops''' (antispin petals, inspin petals, isolations), where the hand and poi paths cross.<ref name="drex-transition">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2010/09/29/soft_hard_and_mixed_transition_theory |title=Soft, Hard, and Mixed Transition Theory |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2010-09-29}}</ref>

== Terminology ==

* '''Extension''': the standard community term, used in VTG, DrexFactor's writing, and general spinner vocabulary.<ref name="vtg-explained">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2015/11/25/vulcan_tech_gospel_vtg_explained |title=Vulcan Tech Gospel (VTG) Explained |date=2015-11-25}}</ref>
* '''Extension driving style''': used in [[Lorq Nichols]]' [[driving style]] taxonomy as one of eight categories of poi movement.<ref name="lorq-driving">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/tag/driving-style/ |title=Driving Style |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

In [[The Kinetic Alphabet]] (TKA), extension is not a single named rotation type. It emerges from the interaction of shift-type hand movements with pro rotation at specific turn counts, depending on the hand path and prop behavior.

== In notation systems ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! System !! Classification !! Notes
|-
| [[Vulcan Tech Gospel|VTG]] || 1:1 inspin pattern || One of the 40 patterns in the 1:1 set. Classified by prop facing (pointing in / pointing out) at cardinal snapshots.<ref name="noel-40">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/vtg-11-necessity-of-40-patterns/ |title=VTG 1:1 Necessity of 40 Patterns |publisher=Noel Yee}}</ref>
|-
| [[The Kinetic Alphabet|TKA]] || Emergent from shift + pro || Not a dedicated rotation type; results from specific hand path and rotation combinations
|-
| [[Lorq Nichols|Lorq's frameworks]] || Extension driving style || One of eight [[driving style|driving styles]]; distinct from isolation and antispin
|-
| [[Trigonometric model (poi)|Trigonometric model]] || ''d'' = +1 (with specific phase) || Same ''d'' value as isolation; the distinction lies in relative phase and hand/prop radius relationship<ref name="drex-math">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2014/05/06/mathematical_approach_classifying_poi_patterns_introduction_and_basics |title=A Mathematical Approach to Classifying Poi Patterns: Introduction and Basics |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2014-05-06}}</ref>
|}

== Role in CAPs ==

Extension is one of the two components of the basic [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|C-CAP]]. The C-CAP alternates between an extension (arc) and one petal of an [[antispin]] flower (loop) by reversing the hand's direction every half circle:

# The hand moves forward, and the poi traces an extension.
# At the halfway point, the hand reverses direction while the poi continues spinning.
# The poi traces one antispin petal.
# The hand reverses again, returning to extension.

This alternation between arc (extension) and loop (antispin petal) is the defining mechanism of CAPs, explained by [[Transition Theory]] as a '''mixed transition'''.<ref name="drex-transition" /><ref name="drex-cap-ext">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2013/11/14/drexs_tech_poi_blog_363_cap_vs_extension |title=Drex's Tech Poi Blog #363: CAP vs Extension |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2013-11-14}}</ref>

== Relationship to other concepts ==

=== Extension vs isolation ===

Both extension and [[Isolation (flow arts)|isolation]] are 1:1 inspin patterns in VTG, but they produce very different visual effects:

* In an '''extension''', the prop tip traces a large circle. The hand and prop travel through space together.
* In an '''isolation''', the prop tip remains relatively stationary. The hand orbits while the prop holds position.

The difference relates to the relative phase between the hand and prop rotations and the ratio of hand path radius to prop length.

=== Extension vs antispin ===

Extension and [[antispin]] represent opposite types of movement in [[Transition Theory]]:

* '''Extension''' creates '''arcs''', smooth, sweeping paths where hand and prop move in parallel.
* '''Antispin''' creates '''loops''', petal shapes where hand and prop paths intersect.

The [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|C-CAP]] mechanism converts between these two states using hand reversals.<ref name="drex-transition" />

== See also ==

* [[Prospin]]
* [[Isolation (flow arts)]]
* [[Antispin]]
* [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]]
* [[Transition Theory]]
* [[Driving style]]
* [[Flower (flow arts)]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
