{{AI generated}}
'''Fire spinning''' (also called '''fire performance''' or '''fire dance''') is the practice of performing [[flow arts]] with props that have been lit on fire. It is one of the most visually dramatic forms of flow arts and has its own set of safety requirements, materials, and community practices.

== Props ==

Most [[flow arts]] props have fire variants:

* '''Fire [[poi]]''': Kevlar wicks attached to chains or cables.
* '''Fire [[Staff (flow arts)|staff]]''': Staff with kevlar wicks on both ends.
* '''[[Fire fans]]''': Metal fans with kevlar wick edges.
* '''Fire [[hoops]]''': Hoops with attached kevlar wicks.
* '''Fire [[rope dart]]''': Weighted kevlar head on a rope.

== Safety ==

Fire spinning requires specific safety protocols:

* '''Fuel''': Common fuels include white gas (Coleman fuel/naphtha), ultra-pure lamp oil, and kerosene. Each has different burn characteristics, flash points, and safety profiles.
* '''Spinning area''': Requires adequate clearance from flammable materials, spectators, and structures.
* '''Safety personnel''': A designated safety person with a fire blanket and/or wet towel should be present during all fire spinning.
* '''Clothing''': Natural fibers (cotton) are preferred over synthetic materials, which can melt to skin.
* '''Fuel handling''': Fueling should occur away from the spinning area. Excess fuel should be spun off before lighting.

== Community ==

Fire spinning is a central element of many flow arts gatherings:

* '''Fire jams''': Informal gatherings where fire spinners practice together.
* '''Burns''' (regional Burning Man events): Often feature fire performance circles.
* '''[[FireDrums]]''': A fire arts gathering co-founded by [[Noel Yee]].
* '''Festivals''': Many flow arts and circus festivals include dedicated fire performance spaces.

== See also ==

* [[Flow arts]]
* [[Poi]]
* [[Fire fans]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
