{{AI generated}}
'''Flower''' in [[flow arts]] refers to the petal-shaped pattern traced by a prop's tip over the course of a full rotation cycle. When a spinning prop completes one or more rotations while the hand orbits, the prop tip traces lobed, flower-like shapes in space. These patterns are a central subject of flow arts theory and a core element of technical spinning vocabulary.

== Description ==

A flower pattern emerges when the prop rotates at a different rate than the hand. As the hand traces its circular orbit, the prop's own rotation causes its tip to trace petals that extend outward from the hand's circular path. The number, size, and shape of these petals depend on the ratio between the prop's rotation speed and the hand's orbit speed.

The simplest flower is a two-petal inspin flower (one prop rotation per hand orbit in the [[prospin|inspin]] direction). More complex flowers have three, four, five, or more petals. Flowers can be created with both [[prospin|inspin]] and [[antispin]] rotation:

* '''Inspin flowers''': The prop rotates with the hand's travel direction. Petals point inward toward the center of the hand's orbit.
* '''Antispin flowers''': The prop rotates against the hand's travel direction. Petals point outward, creating the characteristic pointed shapes most commonly associated with the term "flower" in the spinning community.

== Petal count ==

The number of petals in a flower is determined by the prop-to-hand rotation ratio. In the [[Trigonometric model (poi)|trigonometric model]], the petal count equals <math>|1 - d|</math>, where ''d'' is the relative frequency (ratio of prop rotation to hand rotation).<ref name="drex-math">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2014/05/06/mathematical_approach_classifying_poi_patterns_introduction_and_basics |title=A Mathematical Approach to Classifying Poi Patterns: Introduction and Basics |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2014-05-06}}</ref>

Common flower types:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Petal count !! Rotation type !! VTG ratio !! Common name
|-
| 0 || Inspin (1:1) || 1:1 || [[Isolation (flow arts)|Isolation]] / [[Extension (flow arts)|extension]]
|-
| 2 || Inspin || 1:1 (with additional rotation) || Inspin flower
|-
| 3 || Antispin || 1:3 (four-petal antispin) || Antispin flower / triquetra shape
|-
| 4 || Antispin || 1:3 || Four-petal antispin flower
|-
| 5 || Antispin || 1:5 || Five-petal antispin flower
|}

Note: the VTG ratio system and the mathematical petal-count formula use different conventions. VTG's "1:3" describes the prop-to-hand rotation ratio; the mathematical model derives petal count from the relative frequency parameter.<ref name="drex-math" />

== In notation systems ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! System !! How flowers are described
|-
| [[Vulcan Tech Gospel|VTG]] || The third element of the VTG Trinity. Classified as "the image that the props create stretched out over 360 degrees." Organized by prop-to-hand ratio (1:1, 1:3, 1:5). VTG documents 40 patterns in the 1:1 set.<ref name="vtg-explained">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2015/11/25/vulcan_tech_gospel_vtg_explained |title=Vulcan Tech Gospel (VTG) Explained |date=2015-11-25}}</ref><ref name="noel-40">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/vtg-11-necessity-of-40-patterns/ |title=VTG 1:1 Necessity of 40 Patterns |publisher=Noel Yee}}</ref>
|-
| [[The Kinetic Alphabet|TKA]] || Flowers emerge from multi-turn pro and anti rotations. Turn count determines petal complexity. The flower shape itself is not directly encoded; TKA encodes the hand positions and rotation parameters that produce the flower.
|-
| [[Lorq Nichols|Lorq's frameworks]] || Organized into '''9 flower families''' based on petal shape and orientation.<ref name="lorq-9families">{{cite web |url=http://spinscience.xyz/2014/01/18/lorqtech-41-9-flower-families-with-trails/ |title=LORQ:TECH #41 - 9 Flower Families with Trails |publisher=Spin Science |date=2014-01-18}}</ref> The [[Book of P.H.A.T.]] documents 64 patterns in the 1:3 set using [[Tech Tiles]].<ref name="phat">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/tech-tiles/ |title=Vulcan Tech Gospel Book of P.H.A.T. Volume 1 |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref> The [[Shape Matrix]] cross-references left-hand and right-hand flower shapes.<ref name="shape-matrix">{{cite web |url=http://spinscience.xyz/2016/03/05/shape-matrix-went-poi-chat-viral/ |title=Shape Matrix Went Poi Chat Viral |publisher=Spin Science |date=2016-03-05}}</ref>
|-
| [[Trigonometric model (poi)|Trigonometric model]] || Described by parametric equations. Petal count = <math>|1 - d|</math>. The model is generative: plugging in untried ''d'' values predicts flower shapes not yet performed.<ref name="drex-math" /><ref name="drex-math-flowers">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2014/05/07/mathematical_approach_classifying_poi_patterns_modeling_flowers_and_third_or |title=A Mathematical Approach to Classifying Poi Patterns: Modeling Flowers and Third-Order Motions |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2014-05-07}}</ref>
|}

== 9 flower families ==

[[Lorq Nichols]] organized all flower patterns into nine families based on the shape of their petals and the direction of their loops:<ref name="lorq-9families" />

These families provide a way to classify flowers independently of the specific rotation ratio or notation system. Two flowers from different ratio sets may belong to the same family if they share the same petal shape characteristics.

== Flowers in teaching ==

Flowers serve as a progression framework in poi education. Common teaching sequences move from:

# [[Extension (flow arts)|Extensions]] and [[Isolation (flow arts)|isolations]] (1:1 patterns, no petals)
# Simple antispin flowers (three-petal, four-petal)
# [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|CAPs]] (assembling flower fragments)
# Complex multi-petal flowers and [[Hybrid (flow arts)|hybrids]]

[[Nick Woolsey]]'s [[PlayPoi]] tutorials use flowers as an organizing principle, progressing from basic [[wall plane]] flowers through horizontal flowers and into [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|CAPs]].<ref name="playpoi-flowers">{{cite web |url=https://playpoi.com/learn/poi-flowers/ |title=Getting Started with Poi Flowers |publisher=PlayPoi}}</ref><ref name="playpoi-wall">{{cite web |url=https://playpoi.com/learn/wall-plane-flowers/ |title=Wall Plane Flowers |publisher=PlayPoi}}</ref>

== See also ==

* [[Prospin]]
* [[Antispin]]
* [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]]
* [[Book of P.H.A.T.]]
* [[Shape Matrix]]
* [[Driving style]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
[[Category:Poi technique]]
