{{AI generated}}
In [[flow arts]], '''grip''' refers to the way a performer holds a prop. Different grips change the range of available movements, the feel of the prop, and the visual effect of the performance.

== Common grip types ==

=== Poi grips ===

* '''Handle grip''': Holding a molded handle or knob at the end of the tether. The most common grip for beginners.
* '''Loop grip''': Fingers through a fabric or cord loop. Allows the poi to swing freely around the hand.
* '''Knob/ball grip''': Holding a small ball between the fingers. Common on practice poi.
* '''Palm grip''': Tether runs across the palm, held by closing the hand. Used for some contact and wrap techniques.
* '''Finger loop''': Tether looped around one or two fingers. Allows quick releases for [[Toss (flow arts)|tosses]].

=== Staff grips ===

* '''Center grip''': Holding the staff at its midpoint. Standard grip for two-handed spinning.
* '''Off-center grip''': Holding away from center, creating unequal lengths on either side.
* '''End grip''': Holding near one end, used for single-handed staff or when transitioning to contact.
* '''Overhand/underhand''': Orientation of the palm relative to the staff.

=== Fan grips ===

* '''Standard grip''': Fingers wrapped around the fan handle
* '''Finger grip''': Fan held between specific fingers for tech work

== Grip and technique ==

Grip choice directly affects what techniques are available:

* '''Wraps''' require a grip that allows the tether to wrap and unwrap freely
* '''Tosses''' require a grip that allows clean release and catch
* '''Contact''' techniques often require releasing the grip entirely
* '''Isolations''' may require a loose grip that allows the prop to rotate in the hand

== See also ==

* [[Flow arts]]
* [[Poi]]
* [[Staff (flow arts)]]
* [[Wrap (flow arts)]]
* [[Toss (flow arts)]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
