{{AI generated}}
The '''history of flow arts''' spans from ancient Polynesian traditions to a modern global movement encompassing dozens of prop types, multiple theoretical frameworks, and a growing body of academic research. The term "flow arts" itself dates only to 2003, but the practices it describes are centuries older.<ref name="drex-mainstream">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6D2FBnTU-TA&t=42s |title=Why Didn't The Flow Arts Go Mainstream? |author=DrexFactor Poi |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=0:42}}</ref>

== Polynesian origins ==

=== Maori poi ===

Poi originates with the Maori people of New Zealand. Maori poi consist of a ''raup'' (raupo/bulrush) wrapped around the flower of the raup plant, attached to cords made from ''muka'' (processed flax fiber).<ref name="tepapa">{{cite web |url=https://www.tepapa.govt.nz/discover-collections/read-watch-play/poi/what-makes-poi-traditional-materials |title=What Makes Poi: Traditional Materials |publisher=Te Papa Tongarewa (Museum of New Zealand)}}</ref> The practice dates to at least the 1300s CE.

Maori men used poi to develop wrist flexibility for combat weapons. Women used poi for entertainment, storytelling, and accompaniment to waiata (song).<ref name="fireflow">{{cite web |url=https://fireandflow.co.nz/blogs/resources/te-korero-mo-te-poi-the-story-of-poi |title=Te Korero Mo Te Poi: The Story of Poi |publisher=Fire and Flow NZ}}</ref> Poi remains a living cultural practice in New Zealand.<ref name="drex-what-is-poi-maori">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a966hPArCEk&t=189s |title=What is Poi Spinning? Poi and Flow Arts Explained! |author=DrexFactor Poi |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=3:09}}</ref>

=== Samoan fire knife ===

Between approximately 900 and 1200 CE, Samoan warriors developed the ''ailao'', a war dance performed with the ''nifo oti'' (war club).<ref name="measina">{{cite web |url=https://measinasamoa.com.au/blogs/news/from-warriors-to-performers-the-evolution-of-siva-afi |title=From Warriors to Performers: The Evolution of Siva Afi |publisher=Measina Treasures of Samoa |access-date=2026-02-11}}</ref> The ailao demonstrated martial skill and was performed before and after battle.

In 1946, Freddie Letuli, a Samoan performer living in San Francisco, tied a towel to a nifo oti and lit it on fire. This created the ''siva afi'' (Samoan fire knife dance), the first known instance of lit fire spinning as performance.<ref name="lahaina">{{cite web |url=https://oldlahainaluau.com/samoan-fire-knife-dance/ |title=The Samoan Fire Knife Dance |publisher=Old Lahaina Luau |access-date=2026-02-11}}</ref> The siva afi spread through Polynesian cultural shows in Hawaii and the American mainland, becoming a staple of luau entertainment.

== Western precursors ==

=== Contact juggling and object manipulation ===

In the 1980s, Michael Moschen developed contact juggling and S-shaped staves as performance disciplines. His work emphasized the visual and geometric properties of object manipulation rather than throw-and-catch juggling. Moschen performed the contact juggling sequences in the film ''Labyrinth'' (1986), doubling for David Bowie's hands.<ref name="moschen">{{cite web |url=https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Moschen |title=Michael Moschen |publisher=Wikipedia}}</ref> He received a MacArthur Fellowship ("Genius Grant") in 1990, one of the few object manipulators to receive the award.

=== Fire spinning at Burning Man ===

In 1991, Crimson Rose performed the first fire dance at Burning Man in the Black Rock Desert of Nevada.<ref name="bmjournal">{{cite web |url=https://journal.burningman.org/2022/10/black-rock-city/building-brc/dancing-with-fire/ |title=Dancing with Fire |publisher=Burning Man Journal |date=2022-10}}</ref> This event marked the beginning of fire performance as a regular feature of Burning Man and the broader burn community. Fire conclave performances became a tradition at the event's Saturday night burn, exposing thousands of attendees to fire spinning each year.<ref name="drex-mainstream-bm">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6D2FBnTU-TA&t=105s |title=Why Didn't The Flow Arts Go Mainstream? |author=DrexFactor Poi |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=1:45}}</ref>

=== Glowstringing and rave culture ===

In the early to mid-1990s, glowstringing emerged within rave culture. Ravers attached glowsticks to strings and swung them as a form of freeform dance expression. Glowstringing introduced circular poi-like movement to Western youth culture independently of the Maori tradition.<ref name="drex-glowstringing">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P4dNGrcG3_w |title=Is Glowstringing Poi? |author=DrexFactor Poi |access-date=2026-02-11}}</ref><ref name="glow">{{cite web |url=https://www.liquisearch.com/glowsticking/history_and_culture |title=Glowsticking - History and Culture |publisher=LiquiSearch |access-date=2026-02-11}}</ref>

=== Modern hooping ===

In the mid-1990s, the jam band String Cheese Incident began throwing hula hoops into concert audiences, sparking spontaneous hooping among fans.<ref name="hooping-npr">{{cite web |url=https://www.npr.org/2005/10/18/4964466/hula-hooping-gets-groovy-again |title=Hula Hooping Gets Groovy Again |publisher=NPR |date=2005-10-18 |access-date=2026-02-11}}</ref> Anah "Hoopalicious" Reichenbach became a central figure in developing hooping as a movement art, earning the informal title "mother of modern-day hooping."<ref name="hooping-telluride">{{cite web |url=https://telluridemagazine.com/full-circle/ |title=Full Circle |publisher=Telluride Magazine |access-date=2026-02-11}}</ref> Modern hooping added on-body tricks, off-body manipulation, and dance integration to the traditional hula hoop.

== Building the community (1998--2004) ==

The late 1990s and early 2000s saw the formation of the first organizations dedicated to poi and flow arts.

'''1998:''' Malcolm Crawshay founded [[Home of Poi]] in Christchurch, New Zealand. The site became the largest online poi community, with forums that later hosted foundational theory discussions.<ref name="spinpoi">{{cite web |url=https://spinpoi.com/what-is-poi/ |title=What is Poi? |publisher=SpinPoi}}</ref>

'''2001:''' [[Nick Woolsey]] discovered poi and began developing his teaching practice.<ref name="drex-nick-woolsey">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cTOdxZaXGJ0&t=0s |title=How Nick Woolsey Started a Poi Spinning Revolution |author=DrexFactor Poi |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=0:00}}</ref>

'''2002:''' Isa "GlitterGirl" Isaacs founded the [[Temple of Poi]] in San Francisco, the first dedicated poi school in the world.<ref name="templeofpoi">{{cite web |url=https://templeofpoi.wordpress.com/about/ |title=About Temple of Poi |publisher=Temple of Poi}}</ref>

'''2003:''' GlitterGirl became the first person to use the word "Flow" in the context of poi classes, an early step toward the eventual naming of the discipline.<ref name="fai-history">{{cite web |url=https://flowartsinstitute.com/history-of-term-flow-arts/ |title=History of the Term "Flow Arts" |publisher=Flow Arts Institute}}</ref> In the same year, Sean von Stade founded [[Flowtoys]], a company that would become a leading manufacturer of LED flow props.<ref name="flowtoys-history">{{cite web |url=https://flowtoys.com/pages/history |title=History |publisher=Flowtoys}}</ref>

'''2004:''' Sky Rockit launched [[FireDrums]] on a San Francisco beach, creating the first large-scale gathering dedicated to fire spinning and flow arts.<ref name="firedrums">{{cite web |url=https://firedrums.org/ |title=FireDrums |publisher=FireDrums |access-date=2026-02-11}}</ref><ref name="drex-mainstream-fd">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6D2FBnTU-TA&t=139s |title=Why Didn't The Flow Arts Go Mainstream? |author=DrexFactor Poi |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=2:19}}</ref> [[Nick Woolsey]] founded PlayPoi, an educational platform for poi instruction.<ref name="playpoi">{{cite web |url=https://playpoi.com/about-playpoi/ |title=About PlayPoi |publisher=PlayPoi}}</ref>

== The YouTube revolution and Tech Poi (2005--2008) ==

The launch and rapid growth of YouTube transformed how flow arts knowledge spread. Before YouTube, techniques passed through in-person teaching, festival workshops, and text-based forum posts. Video sharing allowed spinners worldwide to study and replicate techniques at a pace that was previously impossible.<ref name="drex-not-tech-youtube">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2CD6TT8JWlM&t=289s |title=This is Not Tech Poi - A History of Artistic Movements in the Advanced Poi World |author=DrexFactor Poi |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=4:49}}</ref>

[[Ben Drexler]] later characterized 2005 to 2008 as the "Tech Poi" era, defined by a sharp increase in pattern complexity and the dominance of tech-focused blogs and video tutorials.<ref name="eras">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2013/11/07/eras_poi |title=The Eras of Poi |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2013-11-07}}</ref> Spinners began dissecting patterns into their mathematical and geometric components. Online discussion shifted from "how do I do this trick" toward systematic classification of movement.

=== The term "flow arts" ===

In 2006, the combined term "flow arts" appeared on Khan's Blog, hosted on Tribe.net, as a way to describe the broader family of spinning and manipulation disciplines under a single umbrella.<ref name="fai-history" /> The term gained traction gradually. By the early 2010s it was in wide use.

=== DrexFactor ===

On September 8, 2008, [[Ben Drexler]] uploaded his first video to what became the DrexFactor channel.<ref name="drex-15-years">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TEoA6mpRdQo&t=0s |title=15 Years of DrexFactor Poi: My Journey from Hobby to Full-Time YouTube Creator |author=DrexFactor Poi |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=0:00}}</ref> Over the following years, Drexler produced over 500 tech poi blog entries, documenting and synthesizing the theoretical work of the community. DrexFactor became the central archive for poi theory during this period.<ref name="drex-history1">{{cite web |url=https://www.drexfactor.com/index.php?q=weirdscience%2F2016%2F03%2F14%2Fhistory_flow_arts_part_1 |title=History of the Flow Arts, Part 1 |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2016-03-14}}</ref>

=== Flow Temple ===

In 2008, Burning Dan and The TeaFaerie co-founded the Flow Temple in Los Angeles, a dedicated practice space for the flow arts community.<ref name="fai-history" />

== Theory development (2008--2012) ==

The period from 2008 to 2012 saw the creation of most major flow arts theoretical frameworks.

=== Continuous Assembly Patterns ===

Between approximately 2008 and 2010, a French spinner known as Zaltymbunk (Damien, posting as French_Saltimbanque) coined the term "Continuous Assembly Pattern" (CAP) on the [[Home of Poi]] forums. CAPs describe a compositional method for assembling pattern fragments into repeating cycles. The concept became one of the foundational building blocks of poi theory.<ref name="drex-caps">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iv7G74O3Zrs&t=61s |title=Poi 1:1 CAPs: A New Spin on Old Tech Poi |author=DrexFactor Poi |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=1:01}}</ref><ref name="juggle-poi">{{cite web |url=https://www.juggle.org/the-history-of-poi-swinging-within-the-juggling-community/ |title=The History of Poi Swinging within the Juggling Community |publisher=Juggle.org}}</ref>

=== Vulcan Tech Gospel and Transition Theory ===

In 2010, [[Noel Yee]] and [[Jordan Campbell]] formalized [[Transition Theory]] at the [[Vulcan Lofts]] in Oakland, California. Transition Theory describes how spinners move between timing and direction states. This work anchored the [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]] (VTG), a framework for classifying two-prop spinning using timing, direction, and pattern shape.<ref name="drex-not-tech-vtg">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2CD6TT8JWlM&t=271s |title=This is Not Tech Poi - A History of Artistic Movements in the Advanced Poi World |author=DrexFactor Poi |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=4:31}}</ref><ref name="noelyee">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/transition-theory-with-noel-yee/ |title=Transition Theory with Noel Yee |publisher=noelyee.com}}</ref>

[[Lorq Nichols]] visited the Vulcan Lofts in spring 2010 and subsequently created the [[Book of P.H.A.T.]] and the [[Tech Tiles]] visualization system, extending VTG's organizational reach.<ref name="lorq">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/about-2/ |title=About |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

The year 2010 was also marked by loss. Burning Dan, co-founder of Flow Temple, died in October 2010.<ref name="burning-dan">{{cite web |url=https://patch.com/california/venice/dan-gordon-levitt-aka-burning-dan-dies |title=Dan Gordon-Levitt, aka Burning Dan, Dies |publisher=Venice, CA Patch |date=2010-10 |access-date=2026-02-11}}</ref>

=== 9-Square Theory and QFT Notation ===

In 2011, [[Charlie Cushing]] presented [[9-Square Theory]], a spatial grid framework for mapping movement positions, and [[QFT Notation]], a written shorthand for recording poi movements.<ref name="eras" />

=== Shape Matrix ===

In 2012, [[Lorq Nichols]] created the [[Shape Matrix]], a multiplication table for combining left-hand and right-hand flower patterns into two-hand composites. The Shape Matrix went viral on Facebook in 2016, reaching spinners who had not engaged with the earlier theory documents.<ref name="drex-history2">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2016/03/22/history_flow_arts_part_2 |title=History of the Flow Arts, Part 2 |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2016-03-22}}</ref>

=== Fund the Flow Arts ===

In 2011, Fund the Flow Arts was established to support flow arts education and community development through grants and fundraising.<ref name="ftfa-history">{{cite web |url=https://fundtheflowarts.org/history/ |title=History |publisher=Fund the Flow Arts |access-date=2026-02-11}}</ref>

== Drexler's "Eras of Poi" ==

In 2013, [[Ben Drexler]] published "The Eras of Poi," a periodization of poi development:<ref name="eras" />

* '''Classic Poi (?--2004):''' Heavy integration with dance and circus arts. Simpler trick vocabulary. Knowledge transmission through in-person teaching and early web forums.
* '''Tech Poi (2005--2008):''' YouTube drives rapid dissemination. Tech blogs dominate online discussion. Pattern complexity increases sharply.
* '''Post-Tech (2009--2011):''' Contact poi and other sub-disciplines diversify the practice. The community begins questioning the emphasis on technical complexity.
* '''Neo-Classic (2011+):''' A return to body movement, dance integration, and performative expression. Spinners blend technical skill with musicality and flow.

== Commercial and cultural milestones ==

=== Flowtoys Podpoi ===

On Thanksgiving 2012, [[Flowtoys]] launched the Podpoi, a Bluetooth-enabled LED poi that could synchronize colors across multiple sets. The initial production run sold out in six hours.<ref name="podpoi">{{cite web |url=https://flowtoys.com/ts-podpoi |title=Podpoi |publisher=Flowtoys}}</ref> The Podpoi made high-quality LED poi accessible to a broad audience and remains one of the best-selling flow props.

=== Poi in the juggling world ===

In 2018, Chris Kelly became the first poi performer to appear in the International Jugglers' Association (IJA) Top 40 Jugglers Poll, a recognition of poi's growing legitimacy within the broader object manipulation community.<ref name="juggle-poi" />

== Academic research ==

In 2017, Dr. Kate Riegle van West of the University of Auckland published the first clinical study on the health benefits of poi spinning. The study involved 79 older adults and found improvements in grip strength, balance, and upper-body coordination among participants who practiced poi regularly.<ref name="auckland">{{cite web |url=https://www.auckland.ac.nz/en/about/news-events-and-notices/news/news-2017/07/poi-study-points-to-health-benefits-for-over-60s-.html |title=Poi Study Points to Health Benefits for Over-60s |publisher=University of Auckland |date=2017-07}}</ref> This research marked the entry of flow arts into peer-reviewed health science.

== Notation systems ==

Multiple notation systems have been developed to describe and record flow arts movement. Each takes a different approach to representing the relationship between props, hands, and body.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! System !! Creator(s) !! Approximate date !! Approach
|-
| [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|CAP]] || Zaltymbunk (Damien) || 2008--2010 || Compositional assembly of pattern fragments
|-
| [[Vulcan Tech Gospel|VTG]] || [[Noel Yee]], [[Jordan Campbell]], et al. || 2010 || Timing, direction, snapshots, and pattern shape
|-
| [[QFT Notation|QFT]] / [[9-Square Theory]] || [[Charlie Cushing]] || 2011 || Spatial grid and written shorthand
|-
| [[Book of P.H.A.T.]] / [[Tech Tiles]] || [[Lorq Nichols]] || 2010--2012 || Visual tile-based pattern representation
|-
| [[Shape Matrix]] || [[Lorq Nichols]] || 2012 || Multiplication table for composite patterns
|-
| [[The Kinetic Alphabet|TKA]] || Austen Cloud || 2020s || Letter-based notation for two-handed manipulation
|}

== 2016 and beyond ==

In 2016, [[Ben Drexler]] published his two-part "History of the Flow Arts," the most detailed account of the discipline's development to that date.<ref name="drex-history1" /><ref name="drex-history2" />

The 2020s have seen continued development in both technology and theory. Pixel poi, which use persistence of vision to display images and text, have matured into a commercially available product category. [[The Kinetic Alphabet]] (TKA) introduced a new notation system encoding position, rotation, and timing data into letter-based symbols for two-handed prop manipulation.

== See also ==

* [[Flow arts]]
* [[Poi]]
* [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]]
* [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]]
* [[The Kinetic Alphabet]]
* [[Ben Drexler]]
* [[Noel Yee]]
* [[Lorq Nichols]]
* [[Home of Poi]]
* [[Burning Man]]
* [[Flowtoys]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

== External links ==

* [https://flowartsinstitute.com/history-of-term-flow-arts/ History of the Term "Flow Arts" at Flow Arts Institute]
* [https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2013/11/07/eras_poi "The Eras of Poi" at DrexFactor]
* [https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2016/03/14/history_flow_arts_part_1 "History of the Flow Arts, Part 1" at DrexFactor]
* [https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2016/03/22/history_flow_arts_part_2 "History of the Flow Arts, Part 2" at DrexFactor]
* [https://fireandflow.co.nz/blogs/resources/te-korero-mo-te-poi-the-story-of-poi "The Story of Poi" at Fire and Flow NZ]

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
[[Category:Flow arts history]]
