{{AI generated}}
'''Home of Poi''' is a New Zealand-based online community and retailer for [[poi]] and other [[flow arts]] props. It was founded in 1998 by Malcolm Crawshay in Christchurch, New Zealand.<ref name="spinpoi-history">{{cite web |url=https://spinpoi.com/what-is-poi/ |title=What is Poi? |publisher=Spin Poi}}</ref> Its forums were a primary venue for the development of flow arts theory during the late 2000s and early 2010s, sometimes referred to as the "golden age" of poi theory.<ref name="hop">{{cite web |url=https://www.homeofpoi.com/us/lessons/teach/POI/Poi-terminology/Poi-terminology |title=Poi Terminology |publisher=Home of Poi}}</ref>

== Forum contributions ==

The Home of Poi forums hosted foundational discussions in flow arts theory:

* The term "[[Continuous Assembly Patterns|Continuous Assembly Pattern]]" was coined by Damien (French_Saltimbanque/Zaltymbunk) on the forums.<ref name="hop-caps">{{cite web |url=https://www.homeofpoi.com/en/community/forums/topics/891193/What-are-CAP-s |title=What are CAPs? |publisher=Home of Poi Forums}}</ref>
* The "Poi Theory of Everything" collaborative thread explored comprehensive theoretical frameworks.<ref name="hop-theory">{{cite web |url=https://www.homeofpoi.com/en/community/forums/topics/886966/Poi-Theory-of-Everything-An-ongoing-collaboration |title=Poi Theory of Everything |publisher=Home of Poi Forums}}</ref>
* [[Charlie Cushing]]'s [[Continuous Assembly Patterns#8-Step CAP|8-Step CAP]] was presented on the forums.<ref name="hop-8step">{{cite web |url=https://www.homeofpoi.com/us/community/forums/topics/934076/8-step-CAPs |title=8-Step CAPs |publisher=Home of Poi Forums}}</ref>
* [[Ben Drexler|Drexler]]'s hybrid theory was discussed on the forums.<ref name="hop-hybrid">{{cite web |url=https://www.homeofpoi.com/en/community/forums/topics/915407/1/Drex-s-hybrid-theory |title=Drex's Hybrid Theory |publisher=Home of Poi Forums}}</ref>

== Educational resources ==

Home of Poi provides tutorials and lessons covering technique across prop types, including poi, [[fire fans]], [[staff]], and [[hoops]]. The site maintains a terminology reference and lesson progressions for beginners through advanced spinners.<ref name="hop" />

== See also ==

* [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]]
* [[Poi]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

== External links ==

* [https://www.homeofpoi.com/ Home of Poi]

[[Category:Flow arts organizations]]
