{{AI generated}}
'''LED props''' are [[flow arts]] implements fitted with light-emitting diodes (LEDs) for visual performance in low-light conditions. LED technology has expanded the visual possibilities of flow arts and made nighttime performance more accessible than [[fire spinning]].

== Types ==

Most flow arts props have LED variants:

* '''LED [[poi]]''': Balls or pods containing LEDs on leashes. Range from simple single-color to programmable pixel poi that display images and patterns.
* '''LED [[Staff (flow arts)|staff]]''': Staffs with internal LED strips. Some models are programmable.
* '''LED [[Hoops|hoops]]''': Hoops with embedded LEDs, either single-color or programmable.
* '''LED [[Fire fans|fans]]''': Fans with LED edges or embedded pixel strips.
* '''LED [[Clubs (flow arts)|clubs]]''': Clubs with internal lights.

== Technology ==

=== Simple LED ===

Basic LED props use one or a few LEDs with preset modes (solid, strobe, color-fade). These are inexpensive and durable, commonly used for practice.

=== Pixel / programmable ===

Advanced LED props contain strips of individually addressable LEDs that can display images, text, and complex color patterns. When spun, persistence of vision (POV) creates the illusion of a complete image in the air. Pixel poi can display photographs, geometric patterns, and animations.

Notable manufacturers of pixel props include Flowtoys (with their Capsule and Flow wand lines) and various custom builders.

=== Glow ===

Some performers use chemical glow sticks, UV-reactive materials, or EL wire as simpler alternatives to LED technology. [[Glowstringing]], an early form of LED/glow performance, predates much of the modern flow arts LED scene.

== Advantages over fire ==

* No fuel, no burns, no fire safety requirements
* Can be practiced indoors
* Longer performance duration
* Visual effects not possible with fire (colors, patterns, images)
* Suitable for all-ages events

== See also ==

* [[Fire spinning]]
* [[Flow arts]]
* [[Poi]]
* [[Glowstringing]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Props]]
