{{AI generated}}
In [[The Kinetic Alphabet]] (TKA), a '''LOOP''' is a circular sequence where the ending position matches the starting position, allowing the sequence to repeat continuously. LOOPs are constructed by generating a base sequence and then applying a transformation to create a second half that returns to the start.

== Description ==

A LOOP takes a sequence of TKA letters and extends it into a circular pattern by applying one or more transformations to the original sequence. The result is a sequence that, when performed to completion, returns to its starting [[Timing and direction|timing, direction]], and position, allowing seamless repetition.

== Transformation types ==

LOOPs can be created through several transformation operations:

{| class="wikitable"
! Transformation !! Description
|-
| '''Rotated''' || The second half is a 180-degree rotation of the first half
|-
| '''Mirrored''' || The second half mirrors the first half (left-right reflection)
|-
| '''Swapped''' || Red and blue hands swap roles in the second half
|-
| '''Inverted''' || Prop rotation directions reverse in the second half
|-
| '''Rewound''' || The sequence is reversed and appended, playing backward to the start
|}

These transformations can be combined. For example, a "mirrored + inverted" LOOP mirrors the hand positions while inverting the prop rotations.

== Construction ==

To construct a LOOP:

# Generate a base sequence from a word (e.g., "CAKE")
# Verify the starting and ending positions are compatible with the chosen transformation
# Apply the transformation to generate the second half
# The complete LOOP is the original sequence followed by the transformed sequence

== Significance ==

LOOPs represent the choreographic goal of creating patterns that can repeat indefinitely without breaking flow. They are a key compositional tool in TKA, connecting the alphabet system to practical performance.

== See also ==

* [[The Kinetic Alphabet]]
* [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]]
* [[Timing and direction]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts theory]]
[[Category:Notation systems]]
