{{AI generated}}
'''Lorq Nichols''' (also known as '''Sir Lorq''') is an American flow arts theorist, educator, and circus artist. He created the [[Shape Matrix]], the [[Book of P.H.A.T.]], the [[Tech Tiles]] visualization system, and the [[324 Patterns]] framework. He currently teaches at the [[New England Center for Circus Arts]] (NECCA).<ref name="lorq-about">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/about-2/ |title=About |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref><ref name="necca">{{cite web |url=https://necenterforcircusarts.org/about/lorq-nichols/ |title=Lorq Nichols |publisher=New England Center for Circus Arts}}</ref>

== Background ==

Nichols began contact juggling in 2000. He visited the [[Vulcan Lofts]] in Oakland, California in Spring 2010, where he studied under [[Brian Thompson]], [[David Cantor|David "Tankboy" Cantor]], and [[Noel Yee]]. This visit led to his subsequent work extending and visualizing the [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]] framework.<ref name="lorq-about" />

== Contributions ==

=== Book of P.H.A.T. ===

{{main|Book of P.H.A.T.}}

Created with [[Brian Thompson]], [[David Cantor]], and [[Noel Yee]]. '''P.H.A.T.''' stands for "Patterns, Hybrids, And Transitions." The book documents 64 patterns in the VTG 1:3 ratio set (four-petal [[antispin]] [[Flower (flow arts)|flowers]]) organized in an 8x8 grid using the [[Tech Tiles]] visualization system, color-coded pink for left hand and cyan for right hand.<ref name="phat">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/tech-tiles/ |title=Vulcan Tech Gospel Book of P.H.A.T. Volume 1 |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

=== Shape Matrix ===

{{main|Shape Matrix}}

A multiplication table for tricks that cross-references left-hand and right-hand [[Flower (flow arts)|flower]] patterns. Originally created in 2012, reworked in 2014, and went viral on Poi Chat in 2016 with 353 shares and 462 likes.<ref name="shape-matrix">{{cite web |url=http://spinscience.xyz/2016/03/05/shape-matrix-went-poi-chat-viral/ |title=Shape Matrix Went Poi Chat Viral |publisher=Spin Science |date=2016-03-05}}</ref>

=== Tech Tiles and 3D Pattern Player ===

{{main|Tech Tiles}}

The Tech Tiles system provides a visual notation for poi patterns. Nichols also developed the '''Tech Tiles 3D Pattern Player''', an interactive Unity-based tool that allows users to select beginning position, [[Plane (flow arts)|plane]], rotation direction, and speed for each of four elements (left hand, right hand, left prop, right prop).<ref name="tech-tiles-3d">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/tech-tiles-3d-pattern-player/ |title=Tech Tiles 3D Pattern Player |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

=== 324 Patterns ===

{{main|324 Patterns}}

A framework organizing poi patterns as 27 arm paths multiplied by 12 shapes across 3 [[Plane (flow arts)|planes]], producing 324 distinct patterns.<ref name="324">{{cite web |url=http://spinscience.xyz/324-patterns/ |title=324 Patterns |publisher=Spin Science}}</ref>

=== 9 Flower Families ===

Nichols organized all [[Flower (flow arts)|flower]] patterns into nine families based on petal shape and orientation.<ref name="9families">{{cite web |url=http://spinscience.xyz/2014/01/18/lorqtech-41-9-flower-families-with-trails/ |title=LORQ:TECH #41 - 9 Flower Families with Trails |publisher=Spin Science |date=2014-01-18}}</ref>

=== 144 Atomic Hybrids ===

A catalog of 12 shapes multiplied by 9 arm paths, with the principle that "if you know a quarter of a pattern, you know the whole pattern."<ref name="144">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/144ultimatepattern/ |title=144 Atomic Hybrids |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

=== 3 Planes System ===

A classification of all spinning movement by [[Plane (flow arts)|plane]]: Wall (W), Wheel (H), and Floor (F).<ref name="3planes">{{cite web |url=http://spinscience.xyz/3planes/ |title=3 Planes |publisher=Spin Science}}</ref>

=== Driving styles ===

Nichols documented the [[driving style]] taxonomy (originally by Insignia), classifying poi movement into eight categories: [[Isolation (flow arts)|isolation]], [[antispin]], atomics, pendulums, [[Extension (flow arts)|extension]], cateye, [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|CAP]], and [[Hybrid (flow arts)|hybrid]].<ref name="driving">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/tag/driving-style/ |title=Driving Style |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

== Spin Science ==

Nichols publishes educational materials through his '''Spin Science''' brand, including charts, tutorials, and the SpinScience Etsy shop.<ref name="spinscience">{{cite web |url=http://spinscience.xyz/ |title=Spin Science}}</ref>

== See also ==

* [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]]
* [[Shape Matrix]]
* [[Book of P.H.A.T.]]
* [[Tech Tiles]]
* [[324 Patterns]]
* [[Driving style]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

== External links ==

* [https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/ Sir Lorq (WordPress)]
* [http://spinscience.xyz/ Spin Science]
* [https://www.instagram.com/sirlorq/ @sirlorq on Instagram]
* [https://necenterforcircusarts.org/about/lorq-nichols/ Lorq Nichols at NECCA]

[[Category:Flow arts practitioners]]
