{{AI generated}}
'''Plane bending''' is a [[flow arts]] technique where the prop's spinning [[Plane (flow arts)|plane]] transitions smoothly between orientations (e.g., from wall plane to wheel plane) rather than maintaining a single fixed plane. The result is a curved or tilted path that blends multiple planes.<ref name="lorq-bends">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RbH5WcKnfAk&t=5s |title=Plane-Bending Tutorial: 8 Basic Bends |author=Lorq Nichols |date= |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=0:05}}</ref>

== Description ==

In standard spinning, the prop traces a circle in a single plane (wall, wheel, or floor). In plane bending, the performer tilts the plane of the prop's rotation during the spin, so the prop's path curves through three-dimensional space rather than staying flat. [[Lorq Nichols]] demonstrates this as "bending around the front-back axis, which is where our hands move when they move in wall plane."<ref name="lorq-bends-axis">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RbH5WcKnfAk&t=17s |title=Plane-Bending Tutorial: 8 Basic Bends |author=Lorq Nichols |date= |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=0:17}}</ref>

The visual effect is a "bending" of the circular path. Instead of a flat circle, the prop traces an arc on the surface of a sphere or [[toroid]].

== Applications ==

* '''Poi''': Plane bending with poi creates smooth transitions between wall plane and wheel plane patterns, or between any two plane orientations
* '''Staff''': Contact staff plane bending involves rolling the staff through multiple planes
* '''Hoops''': Hoop plane bending (sometimes called "lasso" when transitioning to overhead) is a fundamental hoop technique

== 8 Basic Bends ==

[[Lorq Nichols]] identifies eight fundamental plane bends, derived from the combination of four timing/direction states and two bending directions.<ref name="lorq-bends" />

=== Derivation ===

Nichols presents "plane bending in different timings and directions" to derive the eight bends.<ref name="lorq-bends-derive">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RbH5WcKnfAk&t=75s |title=Plane-Bending Tutorial: 8 Basic Bends |author=Lorq Nichols |date= |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=1:15}}</ref> The eight bends arise from:

* '''4 timing/direction combinations''': same time same direction, same time opposite direction, split time same direction, split time opposite direction
* '''2 bending directions''': bending the plane in the same direction as the poi's travel, or bending in the opposite direction

4 timing/direction states x 2 bending directions = 8 basic bends.

=== Same-direction vs opposite-direction bending ===

The bending direction determines the resulting spatial relationship between the two poi:<ref name="lorq-bends" />

* '''Same-direction bending''': Both poi bend into the same plane family. The two poi remain in a shared plane throughout the bend.
* '''Opposite-direction bending''': The two poi bend into different planes, producing [[Atomic (flow arts)|atomic]] patterns. One poi occupies one plane while the other occupies a different plane simultaneously.

=== Axis of intersection ===

When the poi occupy two different planes (as in opposite-direction bending), the planes share an '''axis of intersection''' -- the line where the two planes cross. For example, when bending between wall plane and wheel plane, the axis of intersection runs along the front-back axis of the spinner's body. The poi oscillate across this axis, moving front-to-back repeatedly.<ref name="lorq-bends" />

== Relationship to 3D spinning ==

Plane bending is the gateway to three-dimensional spinning, where the performer intentionally uses all three planes and the transitions between them as part of their practice.<ref name="drex-breaking-rules">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ivldqe0E2Vg&t=293s |title=Breaking Rules of Poi Spinning |author=DrexFactor |date= |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=4:53}}</ref> The [[Trigonometric model (poi)|trigonometric model]] can describe plane-bent paths by adding a third spatial dimension to the standard 2D equations.

In [[Lorq Nichols|Lorq Nichols']] framework, the three planes (Wall, Horizontal, Floor, abbreviated W/H/F) and their interactions are a core organizational concept.

== See also ==

* [[Lorq Nichols]]
* [[Plane (flow arts)]]
* [[Toroid]]
* [[Atomic (flow arts)]]
* [[Flow arts]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
