{{AI generated}}
'''PlayPoi''' is an online [[poi]] education platform founded by [[Nick Woolsey]] in the fall of 2004.<ref name="playpoi-about">{{cite web |url=https://playpoi.com/about-playpoi/ |title=About PlayPoi |publisher=PlayPoi}}</ref> The site provides a structured curriculum for learning poi spinning, from beginner fundamentals through advanced patterns.

== Beginner series ==

PlayPoi's core offering is a free 50-lesson beginner series hosted on YouTube. The lessons are numbered sequentially from 1.1 through 4.50, organized into four stages that build progressively.<ref name="playpoi-beginner">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLDWMKCqP8aRGhJNxRPbSFWMbEQx3X05hx |title=Beginner Poi Spinning Lessons |publisher=PlayPoi (YouTube)}}</ref> Each lesson introduces a new concept through lead-up exercises before presenting the target pattern. The series covers spinning fundamentals, [[Planes (flow arts)|plane]] awareness, [[timing and direction]], basic [[Flower (flow arts)|flowers]], and intermediate patterns.

== Advanced course ==

Beyond the free beginner series, PlayPoi offers an advanced poi course through Udemy, covering topics such as horizontal flowers, [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|CAPs]], body tracing, and complex transitions.<ref name="playpoi-advanced">{{cite web |url=https://playpoi.com/advanced-poi/ |title=Advanced Poi |publisher=PlayPoi}}</ref>

== Teaching methodology ==

PlayPoi's curriculum reflects Woolsey's pedagogical framework:

* '''Lead-up exercises''': Each pattern is broken into component movements practiced in isolation before being combined. Woolsey compares this to the ''Karate Kid'' training method -- the student practices building-block drills without necessarily knowing which pattern they are preparing for.<ref name="playpoi-beginner" />
* '''Play-first approach''': Lessons encourage free exploration ("play like a 5-year-old") before structured technique, building comfort and proprioceptive awareness early.<ref name="playpoi-about" />
* '''Body-first movement''': The curriculum treats poi as body movement first, prop manipulation second. [[Poi-Fu]] drills address posture, pivot footwork, and torso engagement. [[Nick Woolsey#Poitruvian Arms|Poitruvian Arms]] exercises train arm paths without poi in hand.<ref name="playpoi-beginner" />
* '''Berlin Wall method''': Students practice spinning beside a physical wall for tactile feedback on [[Planes (flow arts)|plane]] control.<ref name="playpoi-beginner" />

== Community engagement ==

PlayPoi runs periodic community challenges, including a 30-day tosses challenge that encourages daily practice of throw-and-catch techniques.<ref name="playpoi-30day-tosses">{{cite web |url=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IP3OpjwnhEc&t=0s |title=Join me for a 30-day poi tosses challenge! |author=PlayPoi |access-date=2026-02-11 |at=0:00}}</ref> The platform maintains an active presence on YouTube, Facebook, and Instagram.<ref name="playpoi-about" />

== Leviathan ==

PlayPoi is also associated with '''Leviathan''', a retreat property operated by Woolsey in Costa Rica that hosts immersive flow arts workshops and residencies.<ref name="leviathan">{{cite web |url=https://playpoi.com/leviathan/ |title=Leviathan |publisher=PlayPoi}}</ref>

== See also ==

* [[Nick Woolsey]]
* [[Poi-Fu]]
* [[Poi learning progression]]
* [[Poi]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

== External links ==

* [https://playpoi.com/ PlayPoi]
* [https://www.youtube.com/@playpoi PlayPoi YouTube channel]

[[Category:Flow arts organizations]]
