{{AI generated}}
The '''poi community''' is the global network of [[poi]] practitioners, teachers, and theorists who share knowledge, develop technique, and gather for practice and performance. The community spans from casual practitioners to professional performers and researchers developing formal notation systems.

== Online communities ==

=== Forums ===

* '''[[Home of Poi]]''': One of the earliest online poi communities. Active in the 2000s, the forums hosted discussions that led to key theoretical developments including early [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|CAP]] concepts.
* '''Reddit r/poi''': Active subreddit for poi discussion, video sharing, and technique questions.

=== Social media ===

* '''Instagram''': Primary platform for sharing poi videos as of the 2020s. Hashtags like #poi, #flowarts, #poispinning connect the community.
* '''Facebook groups''': Various regional and topic-specific groups (e.g., "Poi Chat" for general discussion, "Poi Tech Nerds" for theory).
* '''YouTube''': Long-form tutorials and performances. [[Ben Drexler|DrexFactor]] maintains one of the largest poi tutorial libraries.

== In-person community ==

* '''[[Flow jam]]s''': Regular local meetups for practice
* '''Festivals''': [[FireDrums]], regional burns, dedicated flow festivals
* '''Workshops''': In-person instruction from traveling teachers
* '''Retreats''': Multi-day intensive learning events

== Education ==

Several practitioners have built educational platforms:

* '''[[PlayPoi]]''': Founded by [[Nick Woolsey]], offering structured online courses
* '''[[Prop Logic]]''': Founded by [[Charlie Cushing]], teaching theory-based poi
* '''DrexFactor''': [[Ben Drexler]]'s blog with 500+ technical articles
* '''[[Flow Arts Institute]]''': Co-founded by [[Noel Yee]]

== See also ==

* [[Poi]]
* [[Flow arts]]
* [[Home of Poi]]
* [[Flow jam]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
