{{AI generated}}
'''Reversal''' in [[flow arts]] is a direction change during spinning. When a hand or prop changes its rotational direction, the moment of change is a reversal. Reversals are the fundamental mechanism that enables transitions between patterns and are central to [[Transition Theory]] and the [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|C-CAP]] technique.

== Types ==

Different frameworks identify different types of reversals based on what reverses:

=== In Transition Theory ===

[[Transition Theory]] (by [[Noel Yee]] and [[Jordan Campbell]]) describes reversals as components of four transition types:<ref name="drex-transition">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2010/09/29/soft_hard_and_mixed_transition_theory |title=Soft, Hard, and Mixed Transition Theory |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2010-09-29}}</ref>

* '''Hand reversal only''' (mixed type 1 transition): The hand reverses direction while the prop continues. This converts arcs into loops and vice versa. It is the mechanism behind the [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|C-CAP]].
* '''Prop reversal only''' (mixed type 2 transition): The prop reverses direction while the hand continues.
* '''Both reverse''' (hard transition): Hand and prop both reverse direction simultaneously, creating a mirror image of the pattern.
* '''Neither reverses''' (soft transition): No reversal occurs; the pattern continues in its current direction.

=== In The Kinetic Alphabet ===

[[The Kinetic Alphabet]] (TKA) identifies three reversal types, indicated by colored dots on the left edge of a pictograph:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! TKA reversal type !! What reverses !! Effect !! Transition Theory equivalent
|-
| Hand reversal || Hand changes direction, prop continues || Switches pro to anti or vice versa || Mixed type 1
|-
| Prop reversal || Prop changes direction, hand continues || Switches pro to anti or vice versa || Mixed type 2
|-
| Full reversal || Both hand and prop retrace || Maintains current pro/anti state || Hard transition
|}

== Role in CAPs ==

The hand reversal is the defining gesture of the [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|C-CAP]]. Every half circle, the hand reverses direction while the prop maintains its spin. This mixed reversal alternates between [[Extension (flow arts)|extension]] (arc) and [[antispin]] petal (loop), creating the composite kidney-bean or heart-shaped path characteristic of CAPs.<ref name="drex-transition" />

== See also ==

* [[Transition Theory]]
* [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]]
* [[Timing and direction]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
