{{AI generated}}
In [[flow arts]] theory, '''static''' refers to a hand that remains in a fixed position while the prop rotates around it. The term is used in [[The Kinetic Alphabet]] (TKA) to describe one of the hand path states.

== In The Kinetic Alphabet ==

In TKA, a static hand holds its position at a single grid point while the attached prop spins. This is distinct from a [[Shift (flow arts)|shift]] (curved hand movement) or [[Dash (flow arts)|dash]] (linear hand movement).

Letter types involving static hands:

* '''Type 2 (Shift)''': One hand shifts, one hand is static. Letters G through L.
* '''Type 6 (Static)''': Both hands are static (no hand movement at all). The Greek letters (alpha, beta, gamma, etc.).

A completely static position, where both hands remain fixed and only the props rotate, represents the simplest case of poi spinning: the performer stands still and the props circle around the stationary hands.

== Relationship to other concepts ==

* '''[[Isolation (flow arts)|Isolation]]''': When a prop appears to stay fixed in space, the hand orbits the prop. This is related but distinct from a static hand, where the hand is fixed and the prop orbits.
* '''[[Stall]]''': A momentary stop in prop movement. A static hand is not the same as a stalled prop.

== See also ==

* [[Shift (flow arts)]]
* [[Dash (flow arts)]]
* [[The Kinetic Alphabet]]
* [[Isolation (flow arts)]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
[[Category:Flow arts theory]]
