{{AI generated}}
'''Symmetry''' in [[flow arts]] describes the spatial and temporal relationships between the two sides of a dual-prop pattern. Symmetry concepts underpin several notation systems and are central to understanding how patterns relate to each other.

== Types of symmetry ==

=== Mirror symmetry ===

The left side mirrors the right side. The two props trace mirror-image paths. This is the default expectation for many patterns. In [[The Kinetic Alphabet]], mirroring is one of the [[LOOP]] transformation types.

=== Rotational symmetry ===

The pattern looks the same when rotated by some angle (typically 180 degrees). In TKA, rotational symmetry is another LOOP transformation.

=== Temporal symmetry ===

The first half of a sequence relates to the second half through a transformation. [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]] (CAPs) exhibit temporal symmetry when the pattern cycles back to its starting state.

=== Asymmetry (hybrids) ===

When the two props perform different patterns, the result is asymmetric. [[Hybrid (flow arts)|Hybrids]] intentionally break symmetry for visual effect and technical challenge.

== In notation systems ==

{| class="wikitable"
! System !! Symmetry treatment
|-
| [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]] || "Same" vs "opposite" direction is a symmetry distinction
|-
| [[The Kinetic Alphabet]] || LOOP types define symmetry transformations (rotated, mirrored, swapped, inverted)
|-
| [[Shape Matrix]] || Rows and columns represent symmetric and asymmetric combinations
|-
| [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]] || The 8-step cycle is a symmetric loop through VTG states
|}

== See also ==

* [[LOOP]]
* [[Hybrid (flow arts)]]
* [[Timing and direction]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
[[Category:Flow arts theory]]
