{{AI generated}}
'''Timing and direction''' are the two fundamental variables used to describe the relationship between two spinning objects in [[flow arts]]. Together they form the foundational layer of most flow arts theory frameworks, including the [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]] (VTG), [[The Kinetic Alphabet]] (TKA), and [[Lorq Nichols]]' classification systems.

Any time a performer spins two props simultaneously, those props have a phase relationship (timing) and a relative rotational relationship (direction). These two variables combine to produce four fundamental categories that recur across virtually all two-prop spinning theory.

== Timing ==

'''Timing''' describes the phase relationship between two props. It is measured by comparing the position of each prop in its circular path at any given moment.

* '''Together''' (also called '''same time'''): Both props pass through the same point in their circular path at the same moment. In VTG, the reference point is the '''downbeat''', the lowest point (south) of the circle.<ref name="vtg-explained">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2015/11/25/vulcan_tech_gospel_vtg_explained |title=Vulcan Tech Gospel (VTG) Explained |date=2015-11-25}}</ref>
* '''Split''' (also called '''split time'''): Props are 180 degrees out of phase. When one prop is at the bottom of its circle, the other is at the top.<ref name="vtg-explained" />

== Direction ==

'''Direction''' describes whether two props rotate the same way or opposite ways.

* '''Same''' (also called '''same direction'''): Both props spinning in the same rotational direction (both clockwise or both counterclockwise).
* '''Opposite''' (also called '''opposite direction'''): Props spinning in opposite rotational directions (one clockwise, one counterclockwise).<ref name="vtg-explained" />

== The four categories ==

Combining the two timing options with the two direction options produces four fundamental categories:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! VTG abbreviation !! Full name !! Timing !! Direction
|-
| '''SS''' || Split-Same || Split (180° out of phase) || Same direction
|-
| '''TS''' || Together-Same || Together (in sync) || Same direction
|-
| '''SO''' || Split-Opposite || Split (180° out of phase) || Opposite directions
|-
| '''TO''' || Together-Opposite || Together (in sync) || Opposite directions
|}

In VTG notation, timing is always listed first, direction second.<ref name="vtg-explained" /><ref name="fai-timing">{{cite web |url=https://flowartsinstitute.com/tutsday-timing-direction/ |title=TuTsday: Timing & Direction |publisher=Flow Arts Institute}}</ref>

These four categories are exhaustive for two-prop spinning at equal speed. Every two-prop pattern falls into one of these four states at any given moment (though a pattern may transition between states over time).

== Reference systems ==

Different frameworks anchor their timing and direction measurements to different reference points:

* '''Ground-referenced''' (VTG): The downbeat (the lowest point of the circular path, facing the ground) serves as the anchor. Timing and direction describe what an observer sees from outside the pattern.<ref name="vtg-explained" />
* '''Center-referenced''' ([[The Kinetic Alphabet|TKA]]): Orientations are defined relative to the performer's center point rather than the ground. Positions like "in" (toward center) and "out" (away from center) are measured from the body's midline.

Both systems describe the same physical movements but from different vantage points. A pattern classified as split-same (SS) in VTG encodes the same timing and direction information in TKA, expressed through the specific letter variation selected.

== In notation systems ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Concept !! [[Vulcan Tech Gospel|VTG]] !! [[The Kinetic Alphabet|TKA]] !! [[QFT Notation|QFT]]
|-
| Together timing || "Together" (tog) || Encoded per variation (beta positions) || Hand positions at equal phase
|-
| Split timing || "Split" || Encoded per variation (alpha positions) || Hand positions at opposite phase
|-
| Same direction || "Same" || Both props pro or both anti || Same-signed direction values
|-
| Opposite direction || "Opposite" || One pro, one anti (or mixed) || Opposite-signed direction values
|-
| The four categories || SS, TS, SO, TO || Preserved in variation data || Derivable from notation
|}

In TKA, the concept of timing maps to the '''position''' system: alpha positions correspond to split timing (props on opposite sides of the grid), while beta positions correspond to together timing (props on the same side).<ref name="tka-info">The Kinetic Alphabet uses positions (alpha, beta, gamma, etc.) to encode the spatial relationship between two hands, which implicitly captures timing and direction data.</ref>

== Prop agnosticism ==

Timing and direction are universal properties of any two rotating objects. The concepts apply equally to [[poi]], [[double staff]], [[fire fans]], [[hoops]], [[clubs]], [[buugeng]], and any other paired spinning prop. This universality is why timing and direction form the foundation of multiple independent theory frameworks.<ref name="vtg-explained" />

== See also ==

* [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]]
* [[Transition Theory]]
* [[Prospin]]
* [[Antispin]]
* [[Split time]]
* [[Same time]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts concepts]]
[[Category:Flow arts theory]]
