{{AI generated}}
The '''Vulcan Crew''' was a group of [[flow arts]] practitioners based at [[Vulcan Lofts]] in Oakland, California. Members of the Vulcan Crew were instrumental in developing the [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]] (VTG) framework for two-prop spinning technique. Noel Yee describes VTG as "sort of an open source project," reflecting the collaborative authorship across the group.<ref name="loft-show-1">Noel Yee, "Loft Show Episode 1: Noel Yee and Cassie McKenney" (YouTube)</ref>

== Notable members ==

=== Core theorists ===

* '''[[Noel Yee]]''': Primary VTG compiler, [[Flow Arts Institute]] co-founder.
* '''[[Jordan Campbell]]''': Co-created [[Transition Theory]] with Noel Yee in 2010.<ref name="transition-theory">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/transition-theory-with-noel-yee/ |title=Transition Theory with Noel Yee |publisher=Noel Yee}}</ref>
* '''[[David Cantor|David "Tankboy" Cantor]]''': Co-authored VTG Volume 2. Taught tech poi at the Vulcan.
* '''[[Brian Thompson]]''': Taught club spinning hybrids. Co-developed the 24 Club Hybrid Sequence. His "first drawing" served as the design origin for VTG.<ref name="loft-show-1" />

=== Residents and collaborators ===

* '''[[Cassie McKenney]]''': Vulcan Lofts resident. Co-developed Hoop VTG with Noel Yee and Maiki Nope.<ref name="hoop-vtg">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/hoop-vtg-11-with-cassie-mckenney/ |title=Hoop VTG 1:1 with Cassie McKenney |publisher=Noel Yee}}</ref>
* '''Maiki Nope''': Co-developed Hoop VTG with Cassie McKenney and Noel Yee.<ref name="hoop-vtg" />
* '''[[Zack Buer]]''': Vulcan Lofts resident and Noel Yee's roommate. Designed the VTG2 app pattern visuals.<ref name="loft-show-1" />

=== App and media contributors ===

* '''Kevin (NCK)''': Built the first VTG app.<ref name="loft-show-1" />
* '''[[Alien Jon]]''': Created the VTG app animations.<ref name="loft-show-1" />
* '''[[Forest Sterns]]''': Created the VTG logo.<ref name="loft-show-1" />
* '''Michael Caden Pike''': Built the VTG v3 app (current iOS/Android version).<ref name="vtg-android">{{cite web |url=https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=net.firestaff.mcp.VTGv3&hl=en |title=VTG - Flow Arts Resource |publisher=Google Play}}</ref>

=== Visitors ===

* '''[[Lorq Nichols]]''': Visited in Spring 2010, studying under Thompson, Cantor, and Yee. Subsequently created the [[Book of P.H.A.T.]] and [[Tech Tiles]] visualization system.<ref name="lorq-about">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/about-2/ |title=About |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

== Collaborative culture ==

The Vulcan Crew developed VTG through daily practice and discussion in the shared living environment of Vulcan Lofts. On the question of authorship, Yee states: "Who wrote it? I would say we've all written it over the years of spinning, all of us that have put it together."<ref name="loft-show-1" /> This collective approach extended to app development, visual design, and prop-specific adaptations of the framework.

== Legacy ==

The crew's work laid the groundwork for systematic technical analysis of two-prop spinning that influenced later frameworks including [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]] and [[The Kinetic Alphabet]].

== See also ==

* [[Vulcan Lofts]]
* [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]]
* [[Noel Yee]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts organizations]]
[[Category:Vulcan Lofts]]
