{{AI generated}}
The '''Vulcan Lofts''' was a historic live/work space in Oakland, California, housing over 50 art studios with visual artists, circus performers, and musicians. It became the birthplace of much of modern [[flow arts]] theory during the late 2000s and early 2010s.<ref name="tech-spinning">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2016/05/15/tech_spinning_flow_arts |title=Tech Spinning in the Flow Arts |publisher=DrexFactor |date=2016-05-15}}</ref>

== Flow arts theory ==

The Vulcan Lofts was the primary development site for the [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]] (VTG), [[Transition Theory]], and related frameworks. Key residents and visitors who contributed to flow arts theory included:

* '''[[Noel Yee]]''': Primary compiler of VTG. Background in science education. Co-founder of the [[Flow Arts Institute]], [[FireDrums]], Kinetic Fire, and the Vulcan Crew.<ref name="noel-about">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/about-me/ |title=About Me |publisher=Noel Yee}}</ref>
* '''[[Jordan Campbell]]''': Co-created [[Transition Theory]] with Noel Yee in 2010.<ref name="transition-theory">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/transition-theory-with-noel-yee/ |title=Transition Theory with Noel Yee |publisher=Noel Yee}}</ref>
* '''[[David Cantor|David "Tankboy" Cantor]]''': Co-authored VTG Volume 2. Taught tech poi at the Vulcan.
* '''[[Brian Thompson]]''': Taught club spinning hybrids. Co-developed the 24-Hybrid sequence.
* '''[[Cassie McKenney]]''': Resident. Co-developed Hoop VTG with Noel Yee and Maiki Nope. McKenney states: "Through living at the Vulcan and the people that I met there... I sort of built my whole life around circus."<ref name="sticksout-cassie">Noel Yee, "STICKSOUT PODCAST#12: Cassie McKenney" (YouTube)</ref>
* '''[[Zack Buer]]''': Resident and Noel Yee's roommate, living below Yee's loft bed. Designed the VTG2 app pattern visuals.<ref name="loft-show-1">Noel Yee, "Loft Show Episode 1: Noel Yee and Cassie McKenney" (YouTube)</ref>
* '''[[Lorq Nichols]]''': Visited the Vulcan in Spring 2010, studying under Thompson, Cantor, and Yee. Subsequently created the [[Book of P.H.A.T.]] and [[Tech Tiles]] visualization system.<ref name="lorq-about">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/about-2/ |title=About |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

== Daily culture ==

The Vulcan Lofts fostered a daily spinning culture where residents practiced constantly and developed theory collaboratively. Noel Yee filmed his "Loft Show" content series from his loft bed in the space.<ref name="loft-show-1" /> The proximity of multiple practitioners in a shared living environment enabled the rapid exchange of ideas and techniques that produced VTG, Transition Theory, and related frameworks.

== Legacy ==

The theoretical work developed at the Vulcan Lofts forms the foundation of modern technical spinning education. The [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]], [[Transition Theory]], and the [[Book of P.H.A.T.]] all originated from the collaborative environment of the space.

== See also ==

* [[Vulcan Tech Gospel]]
* [[Noel Yee]]
* [[Lorq Nichols]]
* [[Transition Theory]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

[[Category:Flow arts organizations]]
