{{Infobox framework
| name = Vulcan Tech Gospel
| abbreviation = VTG
| creators = [[Noel Yee]], [[Jordan Campbell]], [[David Cantor]], [[Brian Thompson]]
| year = 2010
| location = [[Vulcan Lofts]], Oakland, California
| scope = Two-prop spinning (prop-agnostic)
| documents = VTG V.1, VTG #2 (Beta), [[Book of P.H.A.T.]]
| app = VTG - Flow Arts Resource (iOS/Android)
}}

The '''Vulcan Tech Gospel''' ('''VTG''') is a theoretical framework for [[prop manipulation|prop spinning]] that classifies the relationships between two spinning objects using timing, direction, and pattern shape. It was developed collaboratively at the [[Vulcan Lofts]] in Oakland, California, primarily by [[Noel Yee]] with contributions from [[Jordan Campbell]], [[David Cantor|David "Tankboy" Cantor]], and [[Brian Thompson]].

VTG is one of the foundational frameworks of modern [[flow arts]] theory. It applies to any form of two-prop spinning, including [[poi]], [[double staff]], [[fire fans]], [[hoops]], [[clubs]], [[buugeng]], and [[triads]].

== History ==

=== The Vulcan Lofts ===

The Vulcan Lofts was a historic live/work space in Oakland, California, housing over 50 art studios with visual artists, circus performers, and musicians. It became the birthplace of much of modern flow arts theory during the late 2000s and early 2010s.<ref name="tech-spinning">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2016/05/15/tech_spinning_flow_arts |title=Tech Spinning in the Flow Arts |date=2016-05-15}}</ref>

Key residents and visitors who contributed to VTG included:

* '''[[Noel Yee]]''' — primary compiler and theorist. Background in science education for children, which informed his teaching methodology. Co-founder of the [[Flow Arts Institute]], [[FireDrums]], [[Kinetic Fire]], and the [[Vulcan Crew]].<ref name="noel-about">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/about-me/ |title=About Me |publisher=Noel Yee}}</ref>
* '''[[Jordan Campbell]]''' — co-created [[Transition Theory]] with Noel Yee in 2010, which "settled the core dogma of VTG."<ref name="transition-theory">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/transition-theory-with-noel-yee/ |title=Transition Theory with Noel Yee |publisher=Noel Yee}}</ref>
* '''[[David Cantor|David "Tankboy" Cantor]]''' — co-authored VTG Volume 2. Taught tech poi at the Vulcan.
* '''[[Brian Thompson]]''' — taught club spinning hybrids. Co-developed the 24-Hybrid sequence.
* '''[[Lorq Nichols]]''' — created the [[Book of P.H.A.T.]] and [[Tech Tiles]] visualization system after visiting the Vulcan in Spring 2010.<ref name="lorq-about">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/about-2/ |title=About |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

=== Development ===

The pivotal moment in VTG's development came in 2010 when Noel Yee and Jordan Campbell formalized [[Transition Theory]], which describes how spinners navigate between different pattern states. This framework unified earlier observations about timing and direction into a coherent system.<ref name="transition-theory" />

[[Lorq Nichols]] visited the Vulcan in Spring 2010, studying under Thompson, Cantor, and Yee. His subsequent work — including the [[Book of P.H.A.T.]], the [[Shape Matrix]], and the [[Tech Tiles 3D Pattern Player]] — extended VTG's visual and organizational reach.<ref name="lorq-about" />

=== Definitions by practitioners ===

Different members of the VTG community define the system in different ways:

* '''David Cantor''': "VTG is a treatise on technical prop manipulation, that seeks to explain the entirety of sets of technique using a predetermined set of constants and variables."<ref name="vtg-explained">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2015/11/25/vulcan_tech_gospel_vtg_explained |title=Vulcan Tech Gospel (VTG) Explained |date=2015-11-25}}</ref>
* '''Ryan Williams''': "A map of possibilities and notation for rhythmic patterns with two props."<ref name="vtg-explained" />
* '''Richard Hartnell''': "VTG is a technical framework for spinning."<ref name="vtg-explained" />

== The VTG Trinity ==

VTG is built on three interconnected concepts, sometimes called the '''VTG Trinity'''.<ref name="vtg-explained" />

=== Timing and Direction ===

The foundational layer of VTG. It describes the relative motion of two rotating objects using two variables:

'''Timing''' measures the phase relationship between two props, anchored to the '''downbeat''' — the lowest point (south) of the circular path.

* '''Together (tog)''': Both props pass through the downbeat at the same moment.
* '''Split''': Props are 180 degrees out of phase — one at the downbeat when the other is at the top.

'''Direction''' describes whether the two props rotate the same way or opposite ways.

* '''Same''': Both props spinning in the same rotational direction.
* '''Opposite''': Props spinning in opposite rotational directions.

These two variables produce four fundamental categories:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Abbreviation !! Full name !! Timing !! Direction
|-
| '''SS''' || Split-Same || Split (180° out of phase) || Same direction
|-
| '''TS''' || Together-Same || Together (in sync) || Same direction
|-
| '''SO''' || Split-Opposite || Split (180° out of phase) || Opposite directions
|-
| '''TO''' || Together-Opposite || Together (in sync) || Opposite directions
|}

Timing is always listed first, direction second.<ref name="vtg-explained" /><ref name="fai-timing">{{cite web |url=https://flowartsinstitute.com/tutsday-timing-direction/ |title=TuTsday: Timing & Direction |publisher=Flow Arts Institute}}</ref>

=== Snapshots (Prop Facing) ===

A '''snapshot''' captures what a pattern looks like at a specific moment — "the image of a given pattern across the x or y axis." At each cardinal point (up, down, left, right), the prop is described as:

* '''Pointing in''': The prop faces toward the performer's center/shoulder.
* '''Pointing out''': The prop faces away from the performer's center.

Snapshots provide a vocabulary for comparing patterns and identifying transitions between them.<ref name="vtg-explained" />

=== Pattern (Shape) ===

The '''pattern''' or '''shape''' is "the image that the props of a given pattern create stretched out over 360 degrees" — the flower shape traced by the prop. VTG organizes patterns by their prop-to-hand rotation ratio:

* '''1:1''' — one prop rotation per one hand rotation (e.g., extensions, isolations)
* '''1:3''' (or '''3:1''') — three prop rotations per one hand rotation (e.g., four-petal flowers)
* '''1:5''' (or '''5:1''') — five prop rotations per one hand rotation

Noel Yee documented '''40 patterns''' in the 1:1 ratio set.<ref name="40-patterns">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/vtg-11-necessity-of-40-patterns/ |title=VTG 1:1 Necessity of 40 Patterns |publisher=Noel Yee}}</ref> [[Lorq Nichols]] documented '''64 patterns''' in the 1:3 ratio set in the [[Book of P.H.A.T.]].<ref name="phat">{{cite web |url=https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/tech-tiles/ |title=Vulcan Tech Gospel Book of P.H.A.T. Volume 1 |publisher=Sir Lorq}}</ref>

== Transition Theory ==

'''Transition Theory''' was created by [[Noel Yee]] and [[Jordan Campbell]] in 2010. It describes how spinners move between the four timing-and-direction combinations (SS, TS, SO, TO).<ref name="transition-theory" />

The framework identifies four types of transitions:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Transition type !! Hand behavior !! Prop behavior !! Effect
|-
| '''Soft''' || Maintains direction || Maintains direction || Preserves the character of the current figure
|-
| '''Hard''' || Reverses direction || Reverses direction || Creates a mirror image in the opposite direction
|-
| '''Mixed''' (type 1) || Reverses direction || Maintains direction || Reverses arc/loop character (the mechanism behind [[C-CAP|C-CAPs]])
|-
| '''Mixed''' (type 2) || Maintains direction || Reverses direction || Reverses arc/loop character
|}

Transition Theory builds on [[Alien Jon]]'s earlier concepts of '''arcs''' and '''loops''':

* '''Loops''': Sections of a pattern where the poi and hand paths intersect (antispin petals, inspin petals, isolations).
* '''Arcs''': Sections where the hand and poi paths run parallel without intersecting (extensions).

Mixed transitions convert arcs into loops and vice versa. This is the fundamental mechanism that enables [[Continuous Assembly Patterns|CAPs]].<ref name="transition-theory-drex">{{cite web |url=https://drexfactor.com/weirdscience/2010/09/29/soft_hard_and_mixed_transition_theory |title=Soft, Hard, and Mixed Transition Theory |date=2010-09-29}}</ref>

== Reference system ==

VTG is '''ground-referenced'''. The downbeat (south, the lowest point of the circular path) serves as the anchor for all timing and direction classifications. This means VTG categories describe what an observer sees from outside — the spatial relationship of the props at a fixed reference point.

This contrasts with some other systems (such as [[The Kinetic Alphabet]]) that use '''center-referenced''' measurement, where orientations are defined relative to the performer's center point rather than the ground.

== Prop agnosticism ==

VTG was designed to apply to all forms of two-prop spinning. Because timing and direction are universal concepts — any two spinning objects have a phase relationship and a relative rotational direction — the framework transfers across prop types:

* '''Poi''' — the original and most common application
* '''Double staff''' — direct transfer of all VTG concepts
* '''Fire fans''' — adapted by Mike Smith ("Doodle") as Fan VTG 1:1
* '''Hoops''' — adapted by [[Cassie McKenney]] and Maiki Nope as Hoop VTG 1:1, covering prop facing and grip shifts specific to hoops<ref name="hoop-vtg">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/hoop-vtg-11-with-cassie-mckenney/ |title=Hoop VTG 1:1 with Cassie McKenney |publisher=Noel Yee}}</ref>
* '''Clubs''', '''buugeng''', and '''triads''' — supported in the VTG app

== Planes ==

VTG recognizes three planes of movement:

* '''Wall plane''' (W): The vertical plane parallel to a wall in front of or behind the performer.
* '''Wheel plane''' (H): The vertical plane perpendicular to the performer, like a wheel rolling alongside.
* '''Floor plane''' (F): The horizontal plane, parallel to the ground.

All VTG patterns can be performed in any of these three planes. The 3 Planes System was formalized by [[Lorq Nichols]] as part of his broader framework, and the plane is a standard parameter in the [[VTG App]].<ref name="3planes">{{cite web |url=http://spinscience.xyz/3planes/ |title=3 Planes |publisher=Spin Science}}</ref>

== Documents ==

=== VTG V.1 ===

The first published VTG document, compiled by Noel Yee with cover artwork by Forest Sterns. Contains the foundational theory of timing, direction, snapshots, patterns, and transition theory.<ref name="vtg-main">{{cite web |url=https://noelyee.com/instruction/vulcan-tech-gospel/ |title=Vulcan Tech Gospel |publisher=Noel Yee}}</ref>

=== VTG #2 (Beta) ===

Co-authored by Noel Yee and David "Tankboy" Cantor. Includes a four-petal antispin flower index.<ref name="vtg-main" />

=== Book of P.H.A.T. ===

{{main|Book of P.H.A.T.}}

Created by [[Lorq Nichols]] with Brian Thompson, David Cantor, and Noel Yee. '''P.H.A.T.''' stands for "Patterns, Hybrids, And Transitions."

* '''Part 1: Manual to Understand''' — theory covering position/rotation, hand and prop positioning, static spin, driving styles, timing and direction.
* '''Part 2: 64 Patterns in Tech Tiles''' — visual demonstrations organized in an 8x8 grid, color-coded (pink for left hand, cyan for right hand).<ref name="phat" />

=== VTG Poster ===

A visual reference highlighting parts of VTG 1 and 2, functioning as both art and educational tool. Available through the [[Flow Arts Institute]].<ref name="vtg-poster">{{cite web |url=https://flowartsinstitute.com/fai-swag-vtg-poster/ |title=FAI Swag: VTG Poster |publisher=Flow Arts Institute}}</ref>

== VTG App ==

The VTG app is available on both iOS and Android, developed by Michael Pike and Noel Yee.

* '''VTG Lite''' (free, iOS) — animations and descriptions for learning VTG basics.<ref name="vtg-ios">{{cite web |url=https://apps.apple.com/us/app/vtg-lite-flow-arts-resource/id1473697606 |title=VTG Lite - Flow Arts Resource |publisher=App Store}}</ref>
* '''VTG Full''' (paid, iOS) — expanded content.
* '''VTG - Flow Arts Resource''' (Android, by Michael Caden Pike) — includes animations for 1:1 and 1:3 patterns, quiz modes, and support for multiple prop types (staff, poi, club, hoop, fan, buugeng, triads).<ref name="vtg-android">{{cite web |url=https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=net.firestaff.mcp.VTGv3&hl=en |title=VTG - Flow Arts Resource |publisher=Google Play}}</ref>

A physical '''VTG Pattern Generator''' is also available, using 3 rules to create all 40 or 64 VTG patterns.<ref name="vtg-generator">{{cite web |url=https://www.etsy.com/listing/247983114/vtg-pattern-generator-1 |title=VTG Pattern Generator |publisher=Etsy}}</ref>

== Related frameworks ==

VTG exists within a broader ecosystem of flow arts theory frameworks:

* '''[[Continuous Assembly Patterns]]''' (CAPs) — a compositional technique that uses VTG's transition theory mechanics to assemble pattern fragments into repeating cycles.
* '''[[9-Square Theory]]''' — [[Charlie Cushing]]'s spatial grid framework, which quantizes the space around the spinner's body and maps transitions between positions.
* '''[[QFT Notation]]''' — a written shorthand system for recording poi movements, developed by Charlie Cushing.
* '''[[Shape Matrix]]''' — [[Lorq Nichols]]' multiplication table for combining left-hand and right-hand flower patterns.
* '''[[The Kinetic Alphabet]]''' — a letter-based notation system for two-handed prop manipulation that encodes timing and direction data per variation.

== See also ==

* [[Continuous Assembly Patterns]]
* [[Transition Theory]]
* [[9-Square Theory]]
* [[Noel Yee]]
* [[Lorq Nichols]]
* [[Flow Arts Institute]]

== References ==

{{reflist}}

== External links ==

* [https://noelyee.com/instruction/vulcan-tech-gospel/ VTG at noelyee.com]
* [https://flowartsinstitute.com/ Flow Arts Institute]
* [https://sirlorq.wordpress.com/tech-tiles/ Book of P.H.A.T. at sirlorq.wordpress.com]
* [https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=net.firestaff.mcp.VTGv3&hl=en VTG App on Google Play]

[[Category:Flow arts theory]]
[[Category:Notation systems]]
[[Category:Vulcan Lofts]]
